=== LAHONTAN'S NEW VOYAGES TO NORTH-AMERICA, ed. Reuben Gold Thwaites (1905) ===
=== VOLUME I (archive.org: newvoyagestonort01laho) ===
L  I  E)  RARY 

OF   THL 

U  N  I  VERS  ITY 

or    ILLINOIS 

9171 

Ll3nE 

1905 


ILL  HIST.  SURVfcl 


LAHONTAN'S 
NEW  VOYAGES  TO  NORTH-AMERICA 

EDITED  BY 
REUBEN  GOLD  THWAITES,  LL.D. 

Volume  I 


Volumes   in  A.   C.  McCLURG   &   CO.'S  series  of 
LIBRARY  REPRINTS    OF   AMERICANA 

THE  EXPEDITION  OF  LEWIS 
AND  CLARK 
Reprinted  from  the  Edition  of  1814.  With  Introduction 
and  Index  by  James  K.  Hosmer,  LL.D.    In  two  vol- 
umes, with  photogravure  portraits  and  maps,  $5.00  net. 

HENNEPIN'S  "A  NEW  DISCOVERY" 

Exact  Reprint  of  the  Second  Issue  of  1698.  With  Intro- 
duction, Notes,  and  an  analytical  Index  by  Reuben 
Gold  Thwaites,  LL.D.  In  two  volumes,  with  fac- 
similes of  original  title-pages  and  of  the  seven  original 
full-page  illustrations,  and  two  large  folding  maps. 
$6.00  net. 

GASS'S  JOURNAL  OF  THE 
LEWIS  AND  CLARK  EXPEDITION 
Reprinted  from  the  Edition  of  181 1.  With  an  analyti- 
cal Index,  and  Introduction  by  James  Kendall  Hosmer, 
LL.D.  In  one  volume,  with  facsimiles  of  the  original 
title-page  and  of  the  five  original  illustrations,  and  a 
reproduction  of  a  rare  portrait  of  Gass.    $3.50  net. 

LAHONTAN'S  NEW  VOYAGES 
TO  NORTH  AMERICA 
Exact  Reprint  of  the  English  Edition  of  1703.  With 
Introduction,  Notes,  and  an  analytical  Index  by  Reuben 
Gold  Thwaites,  LL.D.  In  two  volumes,  with  fac- 
similes of  the  original  title-pages,  and  of  the  twenty- 
four  maps  and  illustrations.     ^7-5°  "''• 


NEW  VOYAGES 

TO 

NORTH-AMERICA 

BY  THE 

BARON  DE  LAHONTAN 


Reprinted  from  the  English  edition  of  ijo^^  with  facsimiles  of 

original  title-pages^  maps,  and  illustrations,  and  the 

addition  of  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Index 

By  Reuben  Gold  Thwaites,  LL.D. 

Editor  of  "The  Jesuit  Relations  and  Allied  Documents,^'  Hennepin's 
"New  Discovery  "  etc. 


3n  CttJo  l^olumeis 
Volume  I 


CHICAGO 

A.  C.  McCLURG  &   CO. 

1905 


Copyright 

A.  C.  McCLURG  &  CO. 

1905 
Published  February  25,  1905 


Composition  by  The  Dial  Press.  Chicago. 
Press-work  by  The  University  Press,  Cambridge. 


> 


b 


CONTENTS  — VOLUME  I 

PAGE 

Introduction —  The  Editor ix 

Lahonton  Bibliography  —  Victor  Hugo  Paltsits      .        .      li 


I 

3 

5 

13 

25 


^  Lahontan's  "New  Voyages  to  North-America" — 
-si  Volume  I. 

Title-page  (facsimile  of  original) 

Dedication  to  the  Duke  of  Devonshire 

Preface 

Contents  of  Letters,  Memoirs,  Discourses,  Dialogue 
J  etc.,  in  both  Volumes 

Letters   I   (November   8,   1683) -XXV   (January  31 

1694)       

Memoirs  of  North-America ;  containing  a  Geograph- 
ical Defcription  of  that  vaft  Continent ;  the  Cuftoms 
_  and  Commerce  of  the  Inhabitants,  &c. 

'^  Introductory  Remarks 299 

"^  A  fhort  Defcription  of  Canada       ....  301 

A  Lift  of  the  Savage  Nations  of  Canada         .         .  339 

A  Lift  of  the  Animals  of  Canada   ....  343 

A  Defcription  of  fuch  Animals  or  Beafts,  as  are 

not  mention'd  in  the  Letters     ....  345 

>5^  A  Lift  of  the  Fowl  or  Birds  that  frequent  the  South 

Countries  of  Canada  .....  350 

-J  The  Birds  of  the  North  Countries  of  Canada        .  351 


vi  Contents 


PAGE 


A  Defcription  of  fuch  Birds  as  are  not  accounted 

for  in  my  Letters 353 

A  Defcription  of  the  Infects  of  Canada        .         .  357 
The  Names  of  the  Fifti  in  the  River  of  St.  Laurence, 

from  its  Mouth  to  the  Lakes  of  Canada  .  358 

The  Fifh  that  are  found  in  the  Lakes  of  Canada, 

and  in  the  Rivers  that  fall  into  'em  .  .  .  359 
The  Fifh  found  in  the  River  of  Miffifipi  .  .  359 
A  Defcription  of  the  Fifh  that  are  not  mention'd 

in  the  Letters 360 

The  Trees  and  Fruits  of  the  South  Countries  of 

Canada 3^4 

The  Trees  and  Fruits  of  the  North  Countries  of 

Canada 3^4 

A  Defcription  of  the  above-mention'd  Trees  and 

Fruits 366 

A  Defcription  of  the  Trees  and   Fruits  of  the 

Northern  Countries 37® 

A  General  view  of  the  Commerce  of  Canada  .  373 

The  Names  of  the  Skins  given  in  exchange,  with 

their  Rates 379 

An  Account   of   the  Government   of  Canada   in 

General 3^^ 

A  Difcourfe  of  the  Interefl  of  the  French,  and  of 

the  Englifh,  in  North-America  .         .         .  394 

A  Table  explaining  fome  Terms  made  ufe  of  in 

both  Volumes 401 


ILLUSTRATIONS— VOLUME  I 

(facsimiles  of  originals) 


PAGE 


A   beaver;    the    hunting    of   buffaloes;    savages 

drying   their  meat Frontispiece 

Map  of  the  Great  Lakes Facing     i 

Map  of  the  straits  of  Mackinac         ...  ,,36 

"Canows  made  of  Birch-bark  "  — sketches  and 

plans  ....••••  jj      oo 

"  M^  De  la  Barre's  camp "         .         .         .         •  ,,124 

"A   General   Map  of  New  France,  Com.  call'd 

Canada"      .  .  .  .  •  •  •  >»     15^ 

"The  curiofity  of  the  Rackets,  and  the  way  of 

hunting  Elks"    .....         o  ,,    188 

"The  Hunting  of  divers  Animals"    .         .         .  „    220 

"  The  Difcovery  of  an  Ambufcade  "   .  .  .  „    254 

"A  Map  of  y^  Long  River  and  of  fome  others 
that  fall  into  that  fmall  part  of  y^  Great  River 
of  Miflifipi  which  is  here  laid  down"  —  with 
sketch-plans  of  a  house,  a  vessel,  and  a  medal  „    284 

"  The  Attack  of  Quebec "  .         .         .         .  »    3^^ 

"  The  Great  bay  of  Placentia  "    ....  ,,    344 

Map  of  Newfoundland       .         .         .         .         .  »    3^4 


INTRODUCTION 

IN  the  frontier  department  of  the  Basse-Pyrenees,  once  a 
part  of  the  ancient  province  of  Beam,  on  gently-undulating 
hillsides  which  occupy  middle  ground  between  the  broad- 
ViUageof  stretching  pastures  and  marshes  of  the  Landes  and 
Lahontan.  ^j^g  over-topping  escarpments  of  the  Pyrenees,  lies 
the  pleasant  little  village  of  Lahontan.  A  community  of 
twelve  hundred  souls,  it  boasts  of  an  interesting  history,  but 
is  now  almost  unknown  in  its  dreamy  isolation,  save  that  the 
scholar  may  remember  that  it  was  once  the  fief  of  the  illus- 
trious Montaigne. 

About  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century,  Lahontan 
was  erected  into  a  barony,  of  which  Isaac  de  Lom,  Sieur 
d'Arce,  the  father  of  our  author,  was  the  second  baron.  The 
Lahontan's  Sieur  d'Arce  was  famous  as  a  civil  engineer,  having 
father.  made  the  port  of  Bayonne  navigable  for  sea-going 

vessels  (1630-48).  As  a  recompense  for  this  and  certain 
military  services,  Louis  XIV  granted  to  him  and  his  heirs  for- 
ever (1658)  a  monopoly  of  navigation  and  transportation  in 
the  harbor  of  Bayonne,  and  a  pension  of  three  thousand  livres 
per  annum  for  a  dozen  years ;  in  later  years,  he  was  made 
reformer-general  of  Beam,  a  councillor  of  the  parlement  of 
Navarre,  a  chevalier  of  St.  Michel,  and  a  bourgeois  of  Bayonne. 

His  first  wife  (Jeanne  Guerin),  with  whom  he  had  lived 
for  fifteen  years,  having  died  in  1663  without  issue,  he  con- 


X  Introduction 

tracted  in  his  old  age  a  second  marriage,  this  time  with 
Birth  of  Jeanne-Fran^oise  le  Fascheux  de  Couttes.  To  them 
our  author,  ^^g  )^^^^  ^^  Lahontan,  the  ninth  of  June,  1666, 
Louis-Armand,  whose  book  of  adventurous  travel  in  the 
heart  of  North  America  we  are  here  reprinting.  The  infant 
was  presented  at  the  baptismal  font  by  no  less  personages 
than  the  Comte  de  Guiche,  then  governor  of  Beam,  and  his 
sister,  the  Marquise  de  Lons, —  a  distinguished  welcome  to 
the  stage  of  life,  in  strong  contrast  to  the  experiences 
incident  to  his  departure. 

When  young  Louis  was  but  eight  years  old,  his  father  died 
at  the  age  of  eighty.  Honors  and  wealth  had  accompanied 
Baron  Isaac  until  about  the  time  of  his  son's  birth;  there- 
A  shattered  after,  he  became  involved  in  the  toils  of  obligations 
estate.  incurred  by  his  great  engineering  operations,  and  of 

the  lawsuits  incidental  thereto.  The  son  inherited  the  title  of 
Le  Baron  de  Lahontan  et  Hesleche  (to-day,  d'Esleich),  and  a 
shattered  estate  which  went  from  bad  to  worse.  It  is  small 
wonder  that  one  of  the  characteristic  features  of  his  Voyages 
is  an  unquenchable  bitterness  against  lawyers  and  legal  pro- 
cesses. 

After  the  fashion  of  the  times,  the  third  baron  had  from 
his  cradle  been  destined  for  the  army;  and  while  still  a  child, 
family  influence  secured  for  him  a  cadetship  in  the  famous 
Bourbon  regiment.  Later,  in  the  effort  to  secure  for  the 
Dedicated  to  young  noblcmau  a  more  rapid  advancement,  he 
the  army.  ^^g  entered  as  a  "garde"  in  the  marine  corps  — 
the  Department  of  the  Marine  being  then  entrusted  with  the 


Introduction  xi 

care  of  colonies.  From  earliest  boyhood,  Louis  had  heard 
much  of  Canada.  From  a  neighboring  seignory  had  gone 
forth  the  Baron  de  St.  Castin,  famous  in  the  annals  of  Maine; 
the  land  of  the  Basques,  on  both  the  Spanish  and  the  French 
slopes  of  the  Pyrenees,  had  for  nearly  two  centuries  been  a 
recruiting  ground  for  adventurers  to  the  New  World;  and 
Louis's  relative,  Claude  Bragelonne,  a  high  official  in  the 
French  army,  had  been  one  of  the  Company  of  the  Hundred 
Associates,  whose  monopoly  long  exploited  the  commerce 
of  the  king's  ambitious  colony  over  seas.  Lefebvre  de  la  Barre 
had  but  just  succeeded  Count  Frontenac  as  governor  of  New 
France.  His  petition  to  the  court  for  eight  hundred  regular 
troops  to  be  used  in  proposed  chastisements  of  the  death- 
dealing  Iroquois,  had  been  in  part  met  by  sending  to  his 
assistance  three  companies  of  French  marines  in  the  autumn 
of  1683.  Enrolled  among  the  members  of  this  detachment  — 
exactly  in  what  official  capacity,  we  do  not  know  —  was  Louis- 
Armand  de  Lorn  d'Arce,  the  youthful  Baron  de  Lahontan, 
then  seventeen  years  of  age. 

Lahontan's  outlook  on  a  life  of  reverses  had  thus  early 
made  of  him  a  cynic.  The  first  Letter  in  his  Voyages^  describ- 
ing the  trip  to  America,  contains  premonitory  symptoms  of 
that  caustic  humor  which  was  soon  to  be  characteristic  of  his 
pen ;  here,  as  later,  description  is  freely  mingled  with  scoffing, 
and  information  with  persiflage.  The  season  was  Arrival  in 
late  when  the  frigate  left  Rochelle ;  it  was  already  ^^^  France. 
November,  with  drift  ice  in  the  St.  Lawrence  and  its  rugged 
shores  white  with   snow,  when  Quebec  was  reached  after  a 


xii  Introduction 

tempestuous  voyage.  "I  cannot,"  Lahontan  tells  his  anony- 
mous correspondent,  "as  yet  give  you  any  account  of  the 
Country,  excepting  that  'tis  mortally  cold."  The  day  follow- 
ing the  arrival  of  the  troops,  the  great  La  Salle  left  the  little 
wilderness  capital  on  his  voyage  to  France,  whence  he  was 
to  embark  for  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  upon  his  final,  fateful 
enterprise. 

The  marines  at  once  went  into  winter  quarters  "  in  fome 
Villages  or  Cantons  adjacent."  It  fell  to  Lahontan's  share  to 
be  billeted  among  the  habitants  of  Beaupre,  some  seventeen 
miles  down  the  river  from  Quebec.  There,  he  declares,  "the 
A  winter  boors  of  thofe  Mauors  live  with  more  eafe  and 
at  Beauprd.  convcniency  than  an  infinity  of  the  Gentlemen  in 
France;"  and  he  has  many  pleasant  words  for  this  "free  fort 
of  People,"  every  one  of  whom  "lives  in  a  good  and  a  well 
furnifh'd  House."  He  remarks  the  vast  fire-places,  and  the 
enormous  quantities  of  wood  consumed,  "by  reafon  of  the 
prodigious  Fires  they  make  to  guard  themfelves  from  the  Cold, 
which  is  there  beyond  all  meafure,  from  the  month  of  Decem- 
ber, to  that  of  April."  Despite  the  nipping  and  protracted 
frost,  the  lad  appears  to  have  been  contented  with  his  lot. 
Hunting  in  company  with  the  Indians,  acquiring  the  dialects 
of  the  tribesmen,  and  visiting  their  villages  in  sledges  and 
upon  snow-shoes,  with  a  few  official  duties  intermingled,  and 
now  and  then  a  gay  assembly  at  the  little  colonial  court  on  the 
hill-top  in  neighboring  Quebec,  furnished  agreeable  diversity 
of  occupation.  His  letters  give  us  a  pleasing  picture  of  life 
among  the   easy-going  habitants  in  the    suburbs;   and  from 


Introduction  xiii 

them  we  also  obtain  a  vivid  notion  of  the  aspect  of  the  little 
frontier  capital,  in  this  hey-day  of  New  France. 

In  the  spring  (1684),  Lahontan  proceeded  under  orders 
to  Montreal.  Along  the  way,  during  a  leisurely  progress,  he 
picked  up  odds  and  ends  of  information,  and  in  brief  phrase 
cleverly  described  what  he  saw.  Late  in  June,  he  An  Iroquois 
accompanied  an  expedition  which  Governor  La  ""^p^'S"- 
Barre  undertook  against  the  recalcitrant  Iroquois,  and  on  the 
eleventh  of  the  following  month  arrived  with  the  advance  party 
at  Fort  Frontenac,  where  they  awaited  the  main  body  of  the 
army;  but  owing  to  the  delays  incident  to  such  enterprises 
under  primitive  conditions,  it  was  some  five  weeks  later  before 
a  start  could  be  made.  Crossing  Lake  Ontario  the  little  col- 
umn took  up  a  position  near  Famine  River,  being  there  so 
wasted  by  malarial  fever  that  La  Barre  was  forced  to  an  igno- 
minious peace,  which  soon  led  to  his  recall  from  the  colony. 
The  story  of  this  unfortunate  expedition  is  skilfully  told  by 
Lahontan,  who  gives  the  speeches  of  the  governor  and  of  the 
Iroquois  envoys  In  phrases  which  have  become  classic  examples 
of  Indian  oratory  and  diplomacy. 

The  following  winter,  the  young  baron  passed  in  garrison 
at  Montreal.  With  the  opening  of  spring  (1685)  he  was  sent 
with  a  detachment  to  the  frontier  fort  of  Chambly,  where  the 
summer  was  spent  in  the  congenial  occupation  of  accompany- 
ing the  neighboring  habitants  and  tribesmen  upon 

.  ,  ,  .  .  Hunting  and 

their   hunting    and    fishing    parties,    which   he    de-    fishing 

•  1  •    ,        ,  f  .  expeditions. 

scribes  with  the  gusto  of  a  true  sportsman  and  a 

close  observer  of  nature.     In  September  he  was  ordered  to 


xiv  Introduction 

Bouchervllle,  to  be  quartered  on  the  habitants  for  the  space 
of  a  year  and  a  half — a  protracted  sojourn,  but  without  ennui, 
for  he  was  given  his  fill  of  sport,  especially  of  elk  hunting, 
at  one  tima  being  absent  upon  such  an  excursion  for  three 
months  in  mid-winter.  On  another  occasion,  he  spent  an 
autumn  month  "in  a  Canow  upon  feveral  Rivers,  Marflies, 
and  Pools,  that  difembogue  in  the  Champlain  Lake,  being 
accompany'd  with  thirty  or  forty  of  the  Savages  that  are  very 
expert  in  Shooting  and  Hunting,  and  perfedly  well  acquainted 
with  the  proper  places  for  finding  Water-foul,  Deer,  and 
other  fallow  Beafts."  He  gives  us  careful  reports  not  only 
of  the  methods  of  the  chase,  but  of  the  habits  of  the  birds 
and  animals,  spiced  with  much  humor  and  keen  comment  on 
men  and  things. 

Dearly   as  the    baron   loved   sport,    he    appears  to    have 

devoted  much  of  his  spare  time,  even  when  in  forest  camps 

amid  rude  wood-rangers  and  savages,  to  study  and  to  mental 

growth.     "  Befides  the  pleafure  of  fo  many  different 

A  student       °  t  ti  -r 

of  the  forts  of  Diverfion,"  he  writes,  "I  was  hkewiie  enter- 
ciassics.  ^^}^5jj  j„  tj^g  Woods  with  the  company  of  the  honeft 
old  Gentlemen  that  liv'd  in  former  Ages.  Honeft  Homer,  the 
amiable  Anacreon,  and  my  dear  Lucian,  were  my  infeperable 
Companions.  Ariftotle  too  defir'd  paffionately  to  go  along 
with  us,  but  my  Canow  was  too  little  to  hold  his  bulky  Equip- 
age of  Peripatetick  Silogifms :  So  that  he  was  e'en  fain  to 
trudge  back  to  the  Jefuits,  who  vouchfaf'd  him  a  very  hon- 
ourable Reception."  We  doubtless  obtain  here  a  ghmpse  of 
the  source  of  the  Dialogues  with  Adario,  which  occupy  so 


Introduction  xv 

large  a  share  of  the  second  volume ;  Lucian  apparently  fur- 
nished the  model  for  those  caustic  satires  on  the  Christianity 
and  civilization  of  the  seventeenth  century. 

The  studies  and  pleasures  of  this  interesting  young  man- 
at-arms  were  occasionally  interfered  with  by  the  austerities 
of  the  priests  about  him.  He  indignantly  relates  that  when 
stationed  in  Montreal  he  was  "inrag'd  at  the  impertinent  Zeal 
of  the  Curate  of  this  City."  Seeking  his  room  in  his  absence, 
this  over-zealous  ecclesiastic  "  finding  the  Romance  of  the 
Adventures  of  Petronius  upon  my  Table,  he  fell  upon  it  with 
an  unimaginable  fury,  and  tore  out  almoft  all  the  Leaves. 
This  Book  I  valued  more  than  my  Life,  becaufe  'twas  not 
caftrated;  and  indeed  I  was  fo  provok'd  when  I  saw  it  all  in 
wrack,  that  if  my  Landlord  had  not  held  me,  I  had  gone 
immediately  to  that  turbulent  Paftor's  House,  and  would  have 
pluck'd  out  the  Hairs  of  his  Beard  with  as  little  mercy  as  he 
did  the  Leaves  of  my  Book." 

In  the  spring  of  1687  all  was  bustling  confusion  In  the  set- 
tlements on  the  St.  Lawrence.     Denonville,  the  new  governor, 
was  about  to  try  his  hand  at  subduing  the  irrepressible  Iro- 
quois, whom  Champlain  had  unwittingly  converted 
into  sworn  enemies  of  the  French.     The  largest    second  iroquois 

...  .  ,  r  ^  11  campaign. 

expedition  yet  projected  was  fitted  out  by  the 
soldier-governor,  and  rendezvoused  at  the  island  of  St.  Helen, 
opposite  Montreal.  Eight  hundred  regulars  had  been  sent 
over  from  France,  doubling  the  number  already  in  the  colony. 
With  the  new  troops  came  an  order  from  the  ministry  to 
allow  the  return  of  young  Lahontan,  whose  tangled   affairs 


xvi  Introduction 

were  sadly  in  need  of  his  presence  in  Paris;  his  relatives  had 
secured  his  furlough  by  the  exercise  of  much  personal  influ- 
ence. But  the  governor,  needing  all  his  useful  men,  deferred 
compliance,  promising  it  for  the  close  of  the  campaign,  and 
Lahontan  had  no  alternative  but  to  advance  a  second  time  into 
the  country  of  the  Iroquois. 

This  campaign,  while  more  fruitful  than  the  preceding, 
effected  nothing  further  than  an  invasion  of  the  land  of  the 
Seneca,  the  laying  waste  of  their  villages  and  harvests,  and 
the  construction  at  Niagara  of  a  fort  designed  to  check  their 
aggressions.  It  was  upon  this  expedition  that  the  few  friendly 
Iroquois,  who  had,  under  missionary  tutelage,  settled  around 
Fort  Frontenac,  were  captured  by  the  French  and  sent  pris- 
oners to  France  to  serve  in  the  royal  galleys — a  piece  of 
arrant  treachery,  which  the  wretched  and  misguided  colony 
was  to  expiate  two  years  later  in  the  fire  and  blood  of  the 
massacre  at  Lachine.  Lahontan's  sympathies  were  so  keenly 
aroused  by  the  unmerited  sufferings  of  these  innocent  prison- 
ers at  Fort  Frontenac,  that  he  stood  in  close  danger  of  falling 
a  victim  to  the  wrath  of  the  Algonkin  allies,  who,  in  their 
savage  fashion,  delighted  in  maltreating  the  ill-fated  Iroquois, 
whom  the  missionaries  had  segregated  from  the  care  of  their 
own  people.  The  baron  had  soundly  thrashed  some  of  the 
young  tormentors,  but  was  immediately  set  upon  by  the 
infuriated  band,  who  "flew  to  their  Fufees,  in  order  to  kill 
me."  He  was  saved  only  by  the  interposition  of  the  Cana- 
dians, who  "  affur'd  'em  I  was  drunk  (Among  the  Savages, 
drunken  Perfons  are  always  excus'd :  for,  the  Bottle  attones 


Introduction  xvii 

for  all  Crimes),  that  all  the  French  were  prohibited  to  give 
me  either  Wine  or  Brandy,  and  that  I  fhould  certainly  be 
imprifon'd  as  foon  as  the  Campaign  were  over." 

The  campaign  finished,  Lahontan  hoped  to  be  allowed  to 
return    to    France,    but    before    having    an    opportunity   of 
reminding  Denonville  of  his  promise  of  a  furlough,  the  luck- 
less officer  was  summoned  to  the  great  man's  pres-   q^^^^^j^^ 
ence  and   informed  that  because  of  his  knowledge   the  Upper 
of  native  languages  and  his  skill  in  forest  diplomacy, 
he  was  detailed  forthwith  to  the  command  of  a  detachment 
destined  to  the  upper  lakes,  in  response  to  the  request  of  the 
wily  Huron  and  Ottawa  of  Lake  Huron,  who  wished  to  "  fee 
a  Fort  fo  conveniently  plac'd,  which  might  favour  their  re- 
treat upon  any  Expedition  againft  the  Iroquefe  ...  At  the 
fame  time  he  affur'd  me,  he  would  inform  the  Court  of  the 
Reafons  that  mov'd   him  to  detain  me  in  Canada,  notwith- 
ftanding  that  he  had  orders  to   give  me  leave  to  go  home. 
You  may  eafily  guefs.  Sir,  that  I  was  thunderftruck  with  thefe 
News,  when  I  had  fed  myfelf  all  along  with  the   hopes  of 
returning  to  France,  and  promoting  my  Intereft,  which  is  now 
fo  much  thwarted." 

The  commands  of  the  governor  were  not  to  be  questioned 
by  a  subordinate,  so  the  disappointed  Lahontan,  smothering 
his  grief  with  reflections  upon  his  professional  advancement, 
once  more  turned  his  back  on  home,  and  hastily  made  pre- 
parations for  his  journey  into  the  vast  and  almost  unknown 
region  of  the  Northwest.  "  The  Men  of  my  Detachment," 
he  writes,  "  are  brisk  proper  fellows,  and  my  Canows  are  both 


b 


xviii  Introduction 

new  and  large.  I  am  to  go  along  with  Mr.  Dulhut,  a  Lions 
Gentleman,  who  is  a  Perfon  of  great  Merit,  and  has  done  his 
king  and  his  Country  very  confiderable  Services.  M.  de 
Tonti  makes  another  of  our  Company ;  and  a  Company  of 
Savages  is  to  follow  us." 

Among  the  motley  war-party  which  Denonville  had  led  to 
his  assault  on  the  insolent  Iroquois,  was  a  band  of  the  "  far 
Indians  "  brought  by  their  commandant,  La  Durantaye,  from 
Fort  St  ^^^  distant  post  of  Mackinac.  Sweeping  down  in  a 
Joseph,  flotilla  of  birch-bark  canoes,  La  Durantaye  had  halted 
his  savage  forces  at  the  head  of  the  strait  leading  from  Lake 
Huron  to  Lake  St.  Clair;  and  there,  on  "  the  seventh  of  June, 
1687,  in  the  presence  of  the  reverend  Father  Angeleran, 
superior  of  the  mission  of  the  Outaouas  at  Michilimachinac, 
of  Ste.  Marie  du  Sault,  of  the  Miamis,  of  the  Illinois,  of  the 
Bale  des  Puans  and  of  the  Sioux,  of  M.  de  la  Forest,  late  com- 
mandant of  the  fort  at  St.  Louis  at  the  Illinois,  and  of  M.  de 
Beauvais,  our  lieutenant  of  the  fort  of  St.  Joseph  at  the  strait 
of  Lakes  Huron  and  Erie,"  had  erected  the  arms  of  France 
and  taken  formal  possession  of  this  vast  region  in  the  name 
of  the  king.i 

The  little  fort  of  St.  Joseph  was  a  bastioned  block-house 
of  logs,  built  the  previous  year  by  Duluth  upon  the  orders 
of  the  governor — one  of  the  long  chain  of  French  posts 
designed  to  keep  English  negotiants  from  the  fur  country. 


^  Prise  de  possession  (vol.x,  fol.  206,  Archives  du  Canada,  at  Paris),  quoted  in 
Roy's  excellent  paper  on  "  Le  Baron  de  Lahontan,"  in  Can.  Roy.  Soc.  Proceed- 
ings, 1894,  sec.  i,  p.  79,  note. 


Introduction  xix 

and  to  control  the  vagrant  coureiirs  des  bois.  This  hnportant 
vantage  point,  refounded  (1701)  some  miles  below  by  La 
Mothe  de  la  Cadillac,  was  the  place  to  which  the  young 
Gascon  was  designated,  and  for  whose  command  he  was 
required  to  abandon  the  gayeties  of  Paris,  and  the  more 
important  business  regarding  his  estates.  Setting  forth  from 
Fort  Niagara  on  the  third  of  August,  Lahontan  and  his  com- 
panions proceeded  westward  as  fast  as  the  crude  transporta- 
tion facilities  of  their  day  would  permit.  The  first  Thejour- 
stage  was  the  long  Niagara  portage,  "being  oblig'd  "^y°"'- 
to  tranfport  our  Canows  from  a  League  and  a  half  below  the 
great  Fall  of  Niagara,  to  half  a  League  above  it.  Before  we 
got  at  any  beaten  or  level  Path,  we  were  forc'd  to  climb  up 
three  Mountains,  upon  which  an  hundred  Iroquefe  might 
have  knock'd  us  all  on  the  head  with  Stones."  Frequently 
attacked  by  these  "  cruel  Fellows,"  Lahontan  was  naturally 
much  alarmed  at  the  danger  of  falling  into  the  hands  of  such 
expert  torturers,  declaring  that  "  To  die  is  nothing  but  to 
live  in  the  midft  of  Fire  is  too  much."  This  constant  fear 
apparently  paralyzed  our  author's  usual  powers  of  descrip- 
tion, for  he  dismisses  with  a  scant  paragraph  the  "  fearful 
Cataract,"  which  nine  years  before  the  garrulous  Friar  Hen- 
nepin had  so  carefully  pictured  with  both  pen  and  pencil. 

The  little  company  of  whites  and  savages  "  coafted  along 
the  North-Coaft  of  the  Lake  of  Erie,"  feasting  abundantly  on 
fish  and  wild  turkeys,  and  arrived  at  the  mouth  of  Lake 
Huron  on  the  fourteenth  of  September.  "  You  cannot  im- 
agine," he  assures  his  correspondent,  "  the  pleafant  profped 


XX  Introduction 

of  this  Strelght,  and  of  the  little  Lake  [of  St.  Clair] ;  for 
their  banks  are  cover'd  with  all  forts  of  wild  Fruit-Trees." 
The  garrison  of  the  little  log  fortress  "  surrendered  their 
Poft  very  chearfully"  to  the  newcomers  and,  being  now 
relieved  from  duty,  in  the  way  of  their  kind  at  once  turned 
fur-traders,  and  quickly  scattered  throughout  the  distant 
camps  of  the  savages. 

Duluth  and  Tonty  tarried  for  a  few  days,  the  former 
having  left  some  supplies  at  this  station  and  being  interested 
in  a  crop  of  Indian  corn  which  he  had  sown  the  previous 
Life  at  Fort  Spring.  Charmed  with  the  beauty  and  free  life  of 
St.  Joseph.  |.j^g  country,  the  youthful  commandant  passed  the 
autumn  agreeably  enough,  occupied  with  the  chase,  to  which 
he  had  become  passionately  devoted,  and  dallying  with  parties 
of  tribesmen  that  passed  up  and  down  bent  on  war,  plunder, 
or  hunting.  But  the  ensuing  winter  was  rigorous  to  a  degree 
that  restricted  hunting,  and  the  consequent  short  commons 
is  suggested  by  Lahontan's  sly  remark  that  the  Jesuit  Father 
Claude  Aveneau,  who  arrived  towards  the  end  of  November 
to  serve  as  chaplain,  "  found  no  occafion  to  trouble  himfelf 
with  preaching  Abftinance  from  Meat  in  the  time  of  Lent." 

By  the  first  of  April  (1688),  the  restless  commander,  no 
doubt  intensely  wearied  by  the  long  and  inactive  winter,  sought 
excuse  in  his  lack  of  provisions  to  set  out  with  the  majority  of 
Departure  his  forcc  —  a  Small  garrison  being  left  at  the  fort 
for  Mackinac.  — £qj.  ^j^g  httle  French  military  and  trading  station 
then  on  the  north  shore  of  the  strait  of  Mackinac,  to  "  buy 
up  Corn  from  the  Hurons  and  Outaouans."     Soon  after  his 


Introduction  xxi 

arrival  at  that  distant  outpost,  there  appeared  there  Abbe 
Cavelier,  La  Salle's  austere  brother,  and  the  other  survivors 
of  the  lost  Texan  colony  of  that  ill-fated  explorer. 

At  Mackinac  Lahontan  learned  also  that  his  own  affairs  in 
France  were  in  desperate  straits.  From  the  "  fagg  end  of  the 
World  "  he  thereupon  addressed  a  letter  to  the  Marquis  de 
Seignelay,  then  powerful  at  court,  craving  his  pro-  An  appeal 
tection  for  the  "  Son  of  a  Gentleman  that  fpent  ^°'  protection, 
three  hundred  Crowns  in  deepening  the  Water  of  the  two 
Gaves  of  Beam  .  .  .  rendering  the  Bar  of  Bayonne  paffable 
by  a  fifty  Gun  Ship,  whereas  in  former  times  a  Frigot  of  ten 
Guns  durft  not  venture  over  it  .  .  .  and  the  bringing  down 
of  Mafts  and  Yards  from  the  Pyrenean  Mountains,  which 
could  never  have  been  effected,  if  he  had  not  by  his  Care, 
and  by  the  disburfing  of  immenfe  Sums,  enlarged  the  quantity 
of  Water  in  the  Gave  of  Oleron  to  a  double  proportion." 
Not  only,  pleads  our  petitioner,  had  the  entailed  privileges 
and  fees  been  cut  off  at  his  father's  death,  but  the  son  had 
been  denied  several  high  political  positions,  *'  all  which  were 
mine  by  Inheritance";  and  now  there  followed  "an  unjuft 
Seizure  that  fome  pretended  Creditors  have  made  of  the 
Barony  of  la  Hontan,  of  a  piece  of  Ground  that  lies  con- 
tiguous to  it,  and  of  a  hundred  thoufand  Livres  that  lay  in 
the  hands  of  the  Chamber  of  Bayonne."  He  is  confident 
that  his  absence  in  the  American  wilds  is  the  sole  justification 
of  his  creditors,  and  asks  for  "Leave  to  come  home  the  next 
Year,"  that  he  may  confront  and  rout  them. 

The  wander  lust  strong  within  his  veins,  the  adventurous 


xxii  Introduction 

lieutenant  roved  as  far  afield  as  Sault  Ste.  Marie  and  the 
neighboring  regions,  and  in  July  joined  a  party  of  Chippewa 
Rovings  in  o^  ^^  inglorious  raid  into  the  Iroquois  country, 
the  Northwest,  ^^g^  q£  Lake  Huron,  stopping  at  his  fort  only  to 
land  a  few  sacks  of  corn.  It  was  upon  this  excursion,  far 
removed  from  his  field  of  duty,  that  Lahontan  was  accom- 
panied by  the  Huron  chief.  The  Rat,  whom  he  has  idealized 
and  immortalized  in  his  Voyages^  under  the  title  "  Adario." 

Late  in  the  summer  he  returned  to  Fort  St.  Joseph,  but 
found  the  situation  now  untenable.  Parties  of  Indians  who 
had  stopped  at  the  post  for  the  usual  parleying  and  present- 
begging,  brought  news  of  the  reduction  of  the  gar- 
joseph  rison  at  Niagara  by  disease  and  destitution,  of  its 
probable  abandonment,  also  of  the  peace  which 
Denonville  was  "  clapping  up  "  with  their  common  foe,  the 
Iroquois.  Lahontan  reasoned  that  all  this  rendered  his  fort 
of  no  value,  that  he  had  an  accumulation  of  scarce  two  months' 
provisions,  and  having  received  neither  orders  nor  supplies 
from  the  governor,  was  thus  thrown  upon  his  own  discretion. 
He  therefore  abandoned  his  command,  burned  the  block- 
house and  its  stockade,  and  on  the  twenty-seventh  of  August 
embarked  with  all  his  men  for  Mackinac,  where  he  arrived  on 
the  tenth  of  the  following  month.  In  the  French  edition  of 
his  work,  the  commandant  elaborately  argues  that  while  the 
abandonment  of  his  post  would  be  a  misdemeanor  in  an 
officer  in  Europe,  it  was  in  the  far  interior  of  America  an 
example  of  military  sagacity.  Whatever  may  be  one's  judg- 
ment on  this  question,  there  is  no  evidence  that  Lahontan 


Introduction  xxiii 

because  of  this  action  was  either  reprimanded  or  degraded  in 
rank.  Doubless  Fort  St.  Joseph  was  valueless  at  this  juncture 
of  affairs,  and  its  destruction  certainly  resulted  in  no  disad- 
vantage to  New  France. 

Upon  reaching  Mackinac  with  his  detachment,  the  baron 
found  advices  to  the  effect  that  he  had  been  relieved,  and 
ordered  to  return  with  his  men  to  Quebec,  provided  "  the 
Seafon  and  other  Circumftances  permit;  or  to  tarry  ordered  to 
here  till  the  Spring  if  I  forefee  unfurmountable  Dif-  ^"'=''"- 
ficulties  in  the  Paffage."  But  the  convoys  for  that  year  had 
returned  to  the  lower  country,  and  the  commandant  at  Mack- 
inac and  the  savages  united  in  representing  to  him  the  diffi- 
culties of  the  journey,  the  rapids  to  be  run,  the  hazardous 
portages  to  be  made.  With  comparatively  inexperienced 
soldiers  this  was  all  but  impossible,  and  they  must  perforce 
content  themselves  in  the  upper  country  until  the  arrival  of 
spring. 

Thus   far   Lahontan    himself   has    been   our    guide;   his 
accounts  of  his  own  adventures  and  shortcomings  have  been 
recorded  in  the  letters  with  a  naivete  and  a  wealth  of  detail 
that  bear  the  stamp  of  verity.     But  we  now  come  to    ^^  ^^.^.^^ 
that  apochryphal  relation  in  the  Voyages^  which  for    to  the 

...  J      River  Loag. 

many  years  has  caused  the  entire  work  to  be  rejected 
by  historians  as  fiction  — the  alleged  journey  to  the  River 
Long.  Writing  to  his  friend  under  date  of  September  i8,  he 
announces  his  intention  "to  travel  through  the  Southern 
Countries  that  I  have  fo  often  heard  of,"  for  "  I  cannot  mew 
my  felf  up  here  all  this  Winter."    The  following  May  he  gives 


xxiv  Introduction 

to  his  correspondent  a  particularized  and  highly  readable 
account  of  the  tour  which  he  pretends  to  have  made,  accom- 
panied by  "  my  own  Detachment  and  five  good  Huntsmen  of 
the  Outaouas,"  later  supplemented  by  Fox  (Outagami)  guides. 

Leaving  Mackinac  on  the  twenty-fourth  of  September, 
the  story  goes,  the  explorers  coasted  along  the  northwest 
shore  of  Lake  Michigan,  visited  the  Sauk,  Potawatomi,  and 
Menominee  villages  on  Green  Bay,  ascended  Fox  River,  made 
the  mile-and-a-half  swampy  portage  to  the  Wisconsin  (Octo- 
ber 16-19),  and  arrived  at  the  Mississippi  four  days  later. 
Working  their  way  up  that  river,  the  party  reached  the  mouth 
of  the  River  Long  on  the  second  of  November.  This  the 
baron  claims  to  have  ascended  for  many  leagues,  visiting  upon 
its  banks  the  wonderful  nations  of  the  Eokoros,  Esanapes, 
and  Gnacsitares,  from  whom  he  gathered  information  con- 
cerning the  Mozeemlek  and  Tahuglauk  beyond  ;  also  of  a 
river  in  the  far  West  that  emptied  itself  into  a  salt  lake  of 
three  hundred  leagues  in  circumference.  At  the  western 
limit  of  this  voyage,  Lahontan,  as  was  the  custom  of  French 
explorers  in  that  day,  set  up  a  long  pole,  bearing  the  "Arms 
of  France  done  upon  a  Plate  of  Lead." 

Upon  the  twenty-sixth  of  January  (1689),  the  adventurers 
set  out  upon  the  return,  reaching  the  Mississippi  on  the  sec- 
ond of  March.  Continuing  their  trip  as  far  down  stream  as 
the  mouth  of  the  Ohio,  they  returned  to  Illinois  River,  by 
means  of  which  and  the  Chicago  portage  they  entered  Lake 
Michigan,  finally  arriving  at  Mackinac  the  twenty-second  of 
May.     Two  weeks  later,  in  the  company  of  twelve  Ottawa 


Introduction  xxv 

Indians,  in  two  canoes,  our  author  set  out  for  Montreal  by 
the  Ottawa  River  route,  after  an  absence  of  two  years  in  the 
wilderness  and  among  the  savages  of  the  Northwest. 

"July  the  9th  I  arriv'd  at  Montreal,  after  venturing  down 
feveral  fearful  Cataracts  in  the  River  of  the  Outaouas,  and 
enduring  the  hardfhips  of  fifteen  or  twenty  Land-carriages, 
fome  of  which  are  above  a  League  in  length."  Near-  fhe return 
ing  Montreal,  his  canoe  overturned  in  the  Sault  St.  '« Quebec. 
Louis,  but  he  was  saved  by  the  adroitness  of  the  Chevalier  de 
Vaudreuil  —  "The  only  time  I  was  in  danger,"  he  exclaims, 
"through  the  whole  courfe  of  my  Voyages."  He  found  the 
colony  calmly  watching  the  departure  of  the  unpopular  Gov- 
ernor Denonville,  but  eagerly  awaiting  the  return  of  the  Count 
de  Frontenac,  "for  that  Governour  drew  Efteem  and  Vener- 
ation, not  only  from  the  French,  but  from  all  the  Nations  of 
this  vaft  Continent,  who  look'd  upon  him  as  their  Guardian 
Angel." 

But  when  the  new  governor  came  on  the  fifteenth  of  Octo- 
ber, he  "  countermanded  the  leave  I  had  to  go  for  France, 
and  has  offer'd  me  a  free  accefs  to  his  Pocket  and  his  Table 
.  .  .  and  fo  I  am  bound  to  obey."  Frontenac  made  The  friend  of 
of  the  penniless  and  now  disconsolate  baron  a  com-  f''°°te°3<^- 
panion  on  his  journeyings,  and,  because  of  his  wide  experience 
at  the  farthest  outposts,  and  his  close  studies  of  the  aborig- 
ines, took  counsel  of  him  in  regard  to  remedies  for  the 
desperate  condition  of  New  France.  In  the  spring  (1690), 
the  governor  offered  to  send  his  protege  on  an  embassy  to  the 
Iroquois ;  but  having  no  wish  again  to  place  his  head  within 


xxvi  Introduction 

the  lion's  jaws,  Lahontan  skilfully  obtained  an  excuse  from 
the  mission.  He  records  with  self-gratulation  that  the  Chev- 
alier d'Aux,  going  in  his  stead,  was  seized,  bound,  and  sent 
to  a  long  imprisonment  at  Boston. 

Lahontan,  meanwhile  following  the  governor's  train,  was 
at  Montreal  when  news  came  of  the  English  invasion  under 
Phips.  Hurrying  to  the  capital  with  his  chief,  he  was  in  time 
to  witness  the  withdrawal  of  the  discomfited  English  admiral 
(October),  and  to  be  chosen  by  Frontenac  to  carry  the  glad 
tidings  to  the  king  and  court.  Thus,  after  seven  years  of 
At  the  French  l^^^  upon  the  frontiers  of  civilization,  the  bronzed 
court.  young  officer  reappeared  at  the  social  capital  of  the 

world,  a  solicitor  of  favors  at  the  court  of  the  great  Louis. 
Unfortunately  his  protector  Seignelay  was  now  dead,  and  the 
new  ministers,  the  Messrs.  Pontchartrain,  looked  with  slight 
favor  upon  the  nonchalant  adventurer  from  America.  They 
coldly  made  answer  to  his  petitions  for  redress,  that  he  could 
have  but  the  summer  to  regulate  his  affairs,  for  in  the  autumn 
he  must  embark  once  more  for  Quebec.  However,  by  way  of 
reward  for  the  welcome  news  he  had  brought,  Lahontan  was 
promoted  to  a  captaincy  in  his  corps,  and  created  a  chevalier 
of  the  order  of  Notre  Dame  of  Mont-Carmel  and  of  St. 
Lazarre.  With  his  customary  cynicism  the  recipient,  who  had 
paid  roundly  in  fees  for  this  last  empty  title,  declares  that 
"  The  Ceremony  of  that  Inftalment  was  perform'd  in  Mr.  de 
Louvois  his  Chamber,  and  did  not  laft  fo  long  as  the  telling 
of  the  Money."  The  new  chevalier  had  entertained  hopes 
that  his  uncle,  the  generous  Abbe  des  Couttes,  might  bestow 


Introduction  xxvii 

upon  him  some  simple  benefice ;  but  a  scruple  of  conscience 
stood  in  the  way  of  granting  church  money  to  one  who,  like 
Lahontan,  scoffed  at  religion  and  its  priests,  and  the  infidel 
applicant  was  sent  away  empty-handed.  With  parting  jibes 
at  the  venality  and  favoritism  prevalent  at  the  court,  the  young 
captain  left  Versailles,  and,  with  no  apparent  reluctance,  for  his 
estate  was  now  beyond  resuscitation,  started  for  La  Rochelle, 
where  he  again  embarked  for  Canada. 

The  eighteenth  of  September,  1691,  found  captain  the 
Baron  de  Lahontan,  now  in  his  twenty-fifth  year,  once  more 
climbing  the  steep  and  winding  roadway  which  ascends  the 
cliflF  of  Quebec,  and  meeting  at  the  chateau  of  his  Again  in 
friend  Frontenac  the  same  generous  hospitality  which  Canada. 
had  previously  been  his,  and  that  of  many  another  luckless 
gentleman  of  that  day.  The  winter  was  exceptionally  gay  at 
the  governor's  little  court.  Balls  and  theatricals  were  much 
in  vogue  among  the  official  class  and  the  fur-trade  and  rustic 
aristocracy ;  but  the  Jesuits  vigorously  condemned  these 
practices,  and  declaimed  publicly  against  the  satellites  who 
hung  about  the  head  of  the  colony.  The  anti-clerical  Lahontan 
was  no  doubt  spurred  thereby  into  a  still  more  active  partici- 
pation in  the  sports  and  vices  of  the  capital. 

To  this  period  probably  belongs  his  experience  with  Mile. 
Genevieve  d'Amours,  a  romance  which  he  relates  under  an 
easily-penetrated  disguise.  No  doubt  the  young  people  met 
freely  during  the  winter's  amusements,  since  the  Lahontan's 
lady  was  a  god-daughter  of  the  governor,  and  be-  f°'"^°"- 
longed  to  the  family  of  one  of  the  royal  councillors.     Her 


xxviii  Introduction 

brothers  were,  as  well,  prominent  young  Canadians,  whose 
attachment  for  the  life  of  the  woods,  common  to  the  young 
gentlemen  of  New  France,  had  tempted  them  to  the  wilder- 
ness of  Pentagoet  and  the  picturesque  River  St.  John,  where 
among  the  Abenaki  savages  they  had  encountered  a  pleasant 
English  gentleman  from  Boston,  who  traded  thither.  The 
fortunes  of  war  had  brought  this  trader  a  prisoner  to  Quebec, 
where  the  genial  Frontenac  treated  him  with  marked  courtesy, 
and  releasing  him  on  parole  made  him  a  participant  in  the 
pleasures  of  the  court.  All  of  these  friends  conspired  in 
making  a  match  between  our  baron  and  the  brilliant  young 
beauty.  On  his  part,  the  governor  promised  licenses  to  the 
sum  of  seven  to  eight  thousand  livres ;  the  English  guest 
requested  leave  to  add  a  thousand  more  —  this,  with  the 
dowry  of  a  thousand  already  possessed  by  the  lady,  would 
have  recuperated  the  ruined  baron's  fortunes ;  and,  basking 
as  they  did  in  the  governor's  favor,  might  have  started  the 
couple  on  the  high  road  to  prosperity.  But  suddenly  the 
negotiations  came  to  a  standstill ;  the  young  cynic  proved 
stubborn,  and  would  not  sign  the  contract.  He  requested 
two  months  in  which  to  consider,  then  two  months  more  — 
which  causes  one  to  wonder  at  the  young  woman's  patience ; 
but  no  doubt  Lahontan  was  a  handsome  fellow,  with  many 
social  graces,  and  considered  a  most  eligible  parti.  At  last 
he  found  his  liberty  more  precious  than  an  establishment  in 
life,  and  repented  of  having  desired  to  make  her  as  unhappy 
as  himself.  "  They  were  far  from  expecting  any  fuch  retrafta- 
tion;  fo  the  poor  reform'd  Captain  fuflPer'd  for  it,  for  fome 


Introduction  xxix 

time  after  Mr.  de  Frontenac  did  him  a  piece  of  Injuftice,  in 
beftowing  a  vacant  Company  over  his  Head,  upon  Madame 
de  Pontchartrain's  Nephew,  notwithftanding  that  the  Court 
had  fent  orders  on  his  behalf." 

Our  author's  nonchalance,  however,  did  not  forsake  him ; 
it  was  not  long  before  he  presented  a  memorial  concerning  the 
defences  of  the  upper  country  against  the  ravaging  Iroquois, 
in  which  plan  the  forgiving  Frontenac  discovered  so  ^  ^^^  ^^^ 
much  merit  that  it  pleased  him  to  order  Lahontan  to    patched  to 

.    .  France. 

go  in  person  to  present  his  project  to  the  ministry. 
In  the   summer  of   1692,   therefore,   the  captain  once  more 
started  for  the  Old  World,  again  bearing  the  governor's  des- 
patches to  the  court  at  Versailles. 

Putting  in  at  Plaisance  (the  Placentia  of  our  day),  a  new 
French  post  upon  the  southeastern  peninsula  of  Newfound- 
land, the  frigate  which  bore  him  awaited  the  fishing  fleet 
which  it  was,  according  to  custom,  to  convoy  to  The  defense 
France.  Just  as  they  were  about  weighing  anchor,  °^  Pia'sance. 
in  the  third  week  of  September,  a  fisherman  arrived  at  the  fort 
with  the  startling  news  that  five  English  frigates  were  bearing 
up  the  bay.  Governor  de  Brouillon,  despite  his  deficient 
fortifications  and  scarcity  of  ammunition,  made  immediate 
arrangements  for  a  vigorous  defense.  Lahontan  was  sent 
with  sixty  habitants  to  repulse  the  landing  of  the  English 
marines.  This  being  skilfully  achieved,  the  English  offered 
to  parley,  whereupon  Lahontan  and  a  companion  were  chosen 
to  go  aboard  the  admiral's  ship,  where  they  were  received 
with   much    courtesy.      Negotiations    failing,   the    governor 


XXX  Introduction 

pushed  the  defenses  v/ith  such  vigor  that  the  English  were 
obliged  to  withdraw,  after  firing  two  thousand  cannon  shots 
at  the  fort  and  burning  some  neighboring  fishing  villages  and 
their  drying  scaffolds. 

A  second  time  the  fortune  befell  Lahontan  to  be  the  beafer 

of  good  tidings  to  the  royal  ear,  again  to  tell  of  the  repulse  of 

a  powerful  English  fleet   by  a  handful  of  defenders  better 

equipped  with  courage  and  energy  than  with  assistance  and 

powder.     Armed  with  this  pleasing  message,  the 

At  Versailles.  .  .         ,     .        -r-,  -  .       , 

captain  arrived  in  Prance  after  a  comparatively 
brief  voyage  of  seventeen  days,  and  shortly  after  presented 
himself  at  Versailles.  The  court,  however,  was  more  ready  to 
receive  agreeable  news  than  to  furnish  the  sinews  of  war  for 
the  far-away  colony.  Lahontan's  ingenious  project  for  the 
defense  of  the  upper  lake  region  smacked  of  large  expendi- 
tures, hence  was  dismissed  with  scant  ceremony ;  but  he  him- 
self was  rewarded  with  the  command  of  an  independent  com- 
pany of  a  hundred  men,  and  the  highly  honorable  position  of 
lieutenant  of  the  king  for  Newfoundland  and  Acadia.  Our 
author  correctly  ascribes  his  good  fortune  to  no  other  patron 
than  good  chance,  remarking  at  the  same  time :  "  I  fhould 
have  been  better  pleas'd  if  I  could  have  put  the  abovemen- 
tion'd  Project  in  execution,  for  a  folitary  Life  is  moft  grate- 
ful to  me,  and  the  manners  of  the  Savages  are  perfectly  agree- 
able to  my  Palate."  The  free,  roving  life  of  the  Great  West 
of  his  day  was  vastly  superior,  in  the  opinion  of  this  man  of 
spirit,  to  immolation  upon  the  storm-swept  fjords  of  gloomy 


I 


Introduction  xxxi 

Newfoundland,  second  in  command  to  a  governor  of  sus- 
picious habits  and  capricious  temper. 

His  new  honors  proved  the  undoing  of  our  unfortunate 
adventurer.  The  coming  upon  the  scene  of  a  royal  lieutenant 
sadly  disarranged  De  Brouillon's  plans  for  his  own  emolument 
and  the  advancement  of  his  family.    Lahontan  was    „     , ,. 

■'  Royal  lieuten- 

received  at  Plaisance  with  grudging  welcome,  and    ant  in  New- 

^        ,     I         ,  ,  ,  foundland. 

soon  an  open  feud  broke  out  between  the  new 
official  and  his  chief.  It  was  not  soothing  to  the  irascible 
governor's  spirits,  that  the  inhabitants  took  the  part  of  the 
subordinate  who  would  not  become  his  puppet ;  that  the 
ready  pen  and  caustic  wit  of  the  latter  made  lampoons  con- 
cerning his  superior,  which  were  sung  publicly  in  the  taverns 
of  Plaisance ;  and  that  even  the  Recollect  friars  protected  the 
young  gallant  in  his  escapades,  and  spoke  in  his  behalf. 

After  the  autumnal  departure  of  the  ships  for  France, 
carrying  to  the  court  De  Brouillon's  accusations  against  his 
lieutenant,  the  former  began  more  freely  to  show  his  temper. 
One  evening  Lahontan  was  entertaining  some  of  the    _  „     ., 

°  ^  °  De  Brouillon's 

residents,  when  his  door  was  suddenly  burst  open,    persecution  of 

,  ......  .      Lahontan 

the  governor  and  his  train  or  serving  men  entered 
masked,  and  began  to  break  the  glass  and  windows,  handle 
the  furniture  roughly,  and  destroy  all  else  that  came  beneath 
their  hands.  By  the  time  the  baron  could  load  his  pistols,  the 
intruders  were  gone ;  but  only  to  fall  upon  his  servants  the 
next  morning,  and  give  them  an  unmerciful  drubbing. 

The  lieutenant,  alleging  fear  for  his  own  life,  determined 


xxxii  Introduction 

to  escape.  The  skipper  of  a  small  fishing  boat  that  lay  in  the 
harbor  accepted  the  ofifer  of  a  thousand  livres  to  carry  the 
An  unwise  fugitive  to  Europc ;  and  thus,  a  second  time  desert- 
escape,        jj^g  j^jg  pQgj.  q£  duty,  he  fled  from  the  hateful  situation 

—  an  unwise  step,  which  brought  a  sweet  revenge  for  De 
Brouillon,  for  it  wrought  the  gallant  young  oflScer's  downfall. 
It  was  the  fourteenth  of  December,  nearly  always  a  boisterous 
month  off  the  dread  coast  of  wreck-strewn  Newfoundland ; 
but  the  risk  was  taken,  several  "  terrible  Storms  "  were  en- 
countered, and  once  they  were  shot  at  by  a  French  privateer 

—  at  last,  however,  the  little  vessel  landed  her  passenger  safely 
in  a  harbor  of  Portugal,  for  he  dared  not  attempt  to  seek 
shelter  in  France,  where  the  only  welcome  he  might  expect 
was  disgrace  and  the  Bastille. 

By  slow  stages  the  unfortunate  runaway  now  journeyed 
into  Holland,  the  home  of  refugees  who  were  "  awaiting 
patiently  till  it  pleafes  God  that  M.  de  Pontchartrain  fhould 
either  remove  to  Paradife  or  do  Juftice "  to  the  wronged. 
Wanderings  of  From  Holland  he  visited  Hamburg,  whence 
the  refugee.  (June  1 9,  1 694),  he  Sent  a  letter  which  was  in- 
tended to  fall  under  the  notice  of  the  French  court,  contain- 
ing an  account  of  the  survivors  of  La  Salle's  last  expedition, 
whom  he  claimed  to  have  met  in  that  city.  The  ministry  at 
once  authorized  investigation,  only  to  find  that  Lahontan  had 
invented  the  tale  out  of  whole  cloth,  in  the  vain  hope  of 
winning  favor  at  court.^ 


1  Margry,   Decowvertes  et   etablissements  des  Franqais   (Paris,    1876-85),   iv, 
pp.  6-8. 


Introduction  xxxiii 

Meanwhile,  our  author  had  proceeded  to  Copenhagen, 
where  he  ingratiated  himself  with  the  French  ambassador,  De 
Bonrepaux,  who  sent  him  to  Versailles  with  favorable  letters 
designed  to  secure  his  pardon  and  re-instatement  in  the  king's 
favor ;  but  his  majesty,  ever  a  severe  disciplinarian,  declined  to 
receive  the  justification  of  an  officer  who  had  transgressed 
against  his  superior,  and  Lahontan  had  no  recourse  but  to 
betake  himself  in  disgrace  to  his  native  province,  where,  his 
barony  having  long  since  been  confiscated,  he  found  himself 
an  unwelcome  guest.  An  order  having  gone  forth  for  his 
arrest,  he  avoided  it  in  the  nick  of  time  by  escaping  across 
the  border  into  Spain,  whence  emanated  the  last  of  his  Letters, 
dated  at  Saragossa,  October  8,  1695. 

Thence,  until  the  initial  publication  of  his  book  in  Holland 
(1703),  we  have  no  details  concerning  the  whereabouts  of  the 
poor  fugitive.  In  the  prefaces  of  the  various  editions,  one 
may  trace  his  wanderings  from  the  Low  Countries 

•'  °  Last  days  at 

to  Denmark,  thence  to  Hanover,  whence  he  visited  the  court  of 
England,  until  the  year  1710  finds  him  at  the  court 
of  the  Elector  of  Hanover,  recognized  as  an  accomplished 
man  beset  by  ill  fortune,  and  maintained  as  the  friend  and 
companion  of  the  philosopher  Leibnitz.  The  unfortunate 
officer  had  then,  according  to  the  latter,^  a  number  of  works 
prepared  which  he  would  give  to  the  press,  if  his  now  im- 
paired health  should  improve.  He  appears  to  have  died  soon 
after  this,  apparently  in  1715,  but  the  actual  date  of  his  decease 
is  not  known.      A  year  or    so   later,   Leibnitz    published   a 


^Leibnitz,  Epistol.  ad  diversos  (Berlin,  1710),  iv,  p.  22. 


xxxiv  Introduction 

posthumous  essay  by  Lahontan,  under  the  title,  Reponse  a  la 
lettre  d'un  particulier  opposee  au  manifeste  de  S.  M.  le  rot  de  la 
Grande-Bretagne  contre  la  Suede,  proving  that  he  followed  the 
increasing  fortunes  of  his  protector,  the  Elector  of  Hanover, 
and  was  ready  to  aid  that  ruler's  cause  with  his  pamphleteer- 
ing pen.  Parkman  also  cites  ^  a  Memoir  on  the  Fur-trade  of 
Canada,  written  in  the  English  interest,  which  was  once  in  the 
library  of  the  poet  Southey. 

Lahontan's  Voyages  to  North  America  was  avowedly  printed 
as  a  last  resource  on  the  part  of  the  bankrupt  fugitive.     We 
have  seen  that  every  vestige  of  hope  regarding  the  resusci- 
tation of  his  estate  had  vanished,  and  all  appeals  to 

Voyages  *  '^ 

published  the  court  for  reinstatement  had  proved  futile  ;  in  this 
crisis,  the  Letters,  which  in  the  event  of  his  monarch's 
favor  might  have  been  consigned  to  the  flames,  were  brought 
forth  from  their  obscurity  and  given  to  the  world  —  his  dis- 
tress thus  proving  our  gain.  While  these  now  classic  epistles 
were  printing  in  Holland,  Lahontan  passed  over  to  England, 
where  he  secured  the  patronage  of  the  powerful  Duke  of 
Devonshire,  and  put  out  an  English  translation  of  his  work, 
which  in  some  respects  is  preferable  to  the  original  French. 

The  vogue  of  the  baron's  book  was  immediate  and  wide- 
spread, and  must  have  soon  replenished  his  slender  purse.  In 
simple  sentences,  easily  read  and  comprehended  by  the  masses, 
Their  Lahontan   recounted  not  only  his  own   adventures 

popularity,  ^j^^^  ^|^g  important  events  that  occurred  beneath 
his  eyes  in  the  much-talked-of  region  of  New  France,  but 


*£a  Salle  and  the  Discovery  of  the  Great  West  (Boston,  1879),  p.  169. 


Introduction  xxxv 

drew  a  picture  of  the  simple  delights  of  life  in  the  wilderness, 
more  graphic  than  had  yet  been  presented  to  the  European 
world.  His  idyllic  account  of  manners  and  customs  among 
the  savages  who  dwelt  in  the  heart  of  the  American  forest,  or 
whose  rude  huts  of  bark  or  skin  or  matted  reeds  nestled  by 
the  banks  of  its  far-reaching  waterways,  was  a  picture  which 
fascinated  the  "average  reader"  in  that  romantic  age,  eager 
to  learn  of  new  lands  and  strange  peoples.  In  the  pages  of 
Lahontan  the  child  of  nature  was  depicted  as  a  creature  of 
rare  beauty  of  form,  a  rational  being  thinking  deep  thoughts 
on  great  subjects,  but  freed  from  the  trammels  and  frets  of 
civilization,  bound  by  none  of  its  restrictions,  obedient  only 
to  the  will  and  caprice  of  his  own  nature.  In  this  American 
Arcady  were  no  courts,  laws,  police,  ministers  of  An  American 
state,  or  other  hampering  paraphernalia  of  gov-  ■^■'"''y- 
ernment;  each  man  was  a  law  unto  himself,  and  did  what 
seemed  good  in  his  own  eyes.  Here  were  no  monks  and 
priests,  with  their  strictures  and  asceticisms,  but  a  natural, 
sweetly-reasonable  religion.  Here  no  vulgar  love  of  money 
pursued  the  peaceful  native  in  his  leafy  home  ;  without  distinc- 
tion of  property,  the  rich  man  was  he  who  might  give  most  gen- 
erously. Aboriginal  marriage  was  no  fettering  life-covenant, 
but  an  arrangement  pleasing  the  convenience  of  the  contract- 
ing parties.  Man,  innocent  and  unadorned,  passed  his  life  in 
the  pleasures  of  the  chase,  warring  only  in  the  cause  of  the 
nation,  scorning  the  supposititious  benefits  of  civilization,  and 
free  from  its  diseases,  misery,  sycophancy,  and  oppression. 


xxxvi  Introduction 

In  short,  the  American  wilderness  was  the  seat  of  serenity  and 
noble  philosophy. 

Europeans   weary  of   courts  and   their   futile  ambitions, 

found  in  all  this  a  delightful  representation.     Moreover,  the 

keenest  curiosity  had  been  aroused  among  them  regarding  the 

New  World  —  a  land  so  enormous  that  its  breadth 

Europeaa  curi- 
osity regarding    had  as  yet  been  scarcely  half-spanned  by  the  most 

the  New  World.  ,  ...  j        i_     • 

adventurous  or  the  rovmg  coureurs  de  bois ;  a 
region  of  great  rivers  and  amazing  cataracts,  of  lakes  like 
inland  oceans,  and  vast  unknown  stretches  wherein  roamed 
mysterious  beasts  of  prey,  and  animals  clad  in  furs  which 
might  be  envied  by  a  monarch.  ■  All  statements  from  such  a 
realm  were  to  be  accepted  as  a  matter  of  course.  The  Rela- 
tions of  the  Jesuits  had  been  read  with  absorbing  interest  by 
people  with  a  turn  for  piety.  Those  more  liberal  in  their 
thinking  turned  with  amused  tolerance  to  the  books  of  the 
garrulous  and  worldly  Recollect,  Friar  Hennepin,  or  found 
keen  but  perhaps  not  too  open  enjoyment  in  the  neatly- 
printed  volumes  of  the  audacious  and  cynical  Baron  de  Lahon- 
tan,  with  their  numerous  flings  at  the  polity  and  teachings  of 
the  Canadian  Jesuits,  and  many  a  well-considered  thrust  at 
king  and  ministry  also.  A  glance  at  Mr.  Paltsits's  Biblio- 
graphy is  sufficient  to  prove  the  demand  for  Lahontan's 
Voyages  —  a  taste  lasting  well  into  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth 
century. 

In  estimating  the  historical  value  of  this  work,  it  is  well  to 
bear  in  mind  what  we  believe  to  be  its  double  purpose  —  that 
of  a  satire  upon  European  life  and  civilization,  and  a  narration 


Introduction  xxxvii 

of  the  author's  adventures  in  new  and  unknown  realms.  The 
first  understood  and  allowed  for,  the  book  becomes  ^^^^^^^^^ 
of  great  utility  to  the  student  of  life  and  conditions  utility  to 
in  the  forests  and  hamlets  of  New  France.  Here  is 
no  rambling  journal-writer,  like  Father  Hennepin,  puflfed  up 
by  inordinate  vanity.  Lahontan  relates  in  a  clear,  straight- 
forward manner  all  that  came  before  his  eyes.  With  vivid 
strokes,  he  pictures  the  thinly  diffused  colony  of  New  France 
—  fishing  hamlets  fringing  the  fog-drenched  fjords  of  spruce- 
mantled  Newfoundland ;  the  fur-trade  rendezvous  at  gloomy 
Tadoussac ;  habitants  nestled  upon  the  billowy  shores  of  the 
St.  Lawrence,  or  on  waving  meadows  at  the  mouths  of  its  trib- 
utaries, v/hich  come  swiftly  coursing  from  out  the  dark  forests 
hanging  on  its  rugged  rim ;  the  capital,  perched  defiantly  on 
the  steep  cliff  of  Quebec,  overlooking  hillsides  and  rolling 
plains,  in  his  day  becoming  well-dotted  with  the  whitewashed 
stone  cabins  of  a  thrifty  peasantry ;  Three  Rivers,  the  centre 
of  a  widespread  commerce ;  ecclesiastical  Montreal,  shad- 
owed by  its  mountain,  and  ever  alert  against  the  crouching 
Iroquois;  and  beyond  that  —  up  the  stately  Ottawa  or  along 
the  far-reaching  waters  of  the  upper  lakes,  and  still  farther 
beyond  upon  the  interlocking  drainage  systems  of  the  conti- 
nental interior  —  the  isolated  camps  of  coureurs  de  bois,  and 
little  log  fortresses,  like  that  of  St.  Joseph,  seeking  to  hold 
the  wilderness  trade  against  all  comers. 

A  participant  in  some  of  the  most  stirring  campaigns  in 
the  brilliant  epoch  of  Frontenac's  government,  Lahontan  pre- 
sents to  us  admirable  reports  of  these  events.   We  have  also  in 


xxxviii  Introduction 

his  pages  first-hand  accounts  of  the  political  institutions  of  the 
colony  —  its  officials,  courts,  and  local  government,  combined 
with  Incisive  characterizations  of  the  respective  governors, 
intendants,  and  official  noblesse.  The  strutting  functionary, 
the  zealous  Jesuit  who  balks  at  no  hazard,  the  gay  soldier, 
the  hardy  habitant,  the  roving  coureur  de  bois,  and  the  naked 
savage,  all  stand  out  in  bold  relief  upon  his  pages.  Even  the 
birds  and  animals,  the  plants,  and  the  minerals  of  this  strange 
land  do  not  escape  our  observer's  eye.  Thus  not  only  in 
history,  but  in  topography,  geography,  ethnology,  and  natural 
history,  all  of  it  the  record  of  personal  knowledge,  Lahontan's 
work  stands  as  one  of  the  important  sources  for  the  intimate 
study  of  New  France. 

The  frequent  neglect  of  Lahontan  by  scientific  and  his- 
torical students,  has  not  been  justified  by  the  lack  of  material 
in  his  pages.    As  already  intimated,  it  is  in  large  measure  due 
.    .        to  the  spurious  character  of  the  alleged  discovery 

Investigations  ^ 

as  to  the  of   the   River   Long,  described   In    the    sixteenth 

ong.  Lg^-^gj.^  Investigators  have,  from  this  one  chapter, 
rejected  all.  The  geographers  of  the  time,  eager  for  informa- 
tion regarding  heretofore  unknown  regions  in  North  America, 
were  easily  deceived  by  the  circumstantial  character  of  our 
author's  fluent  description,  and  especially  by  his  map  of  the 
mythical  waterway ;  and  in  consequence  the  river  was  incor- 
porated in  several  maps  published  early  in  the  eighteenth 
century,  persisting  even  down  to  that  of  Vaugondy,  corrected 
to  1783.  But  doubts  soon  arose  in  the  minds  of  some. 
Hennepin  had  omitted   to   mention  such  a  stream,  or  the 


Introduction  xxxix 

peoples  that  Lahontan  had  placed  upon  its  banks.  The 
miner  and  trader  Le  Sueur,  a  colleague  of  Iberville,  who 
ascended  the  Mississippi  nearly  to  its  source  and  passed  two 
years  (1700-02)  upon  its  upper  waters,  reported  neither  the 
Long  nor  its  tribes.  Perrot  and  Duluth,  eminent  forest 
rangers  of  the  period,  knew  no  such  river  —  but  they  were 
not  authors ;  and  it  was  probably  not  until  Charlevoix  visited 
the  country  (1721)  and  published  his  Journal  historique^  that 
the  spurious  nature  of  Lahontan's  pretended  discovery  fully 
dawned  upon  the  European  world.  In  1728  a  French  expe- 
dition built  a  fort  upon  Lake  Pepin,  in  the  upper  Mississippi 

—  one  of  the  chain  which  was  to  further  the  discovery  of  a 
route  to  the  Pacific.  Its  officers  found  the  Issati  of  Hennepin 
and  the  Scioux  of  Le  Sueur,  but  no  traces  of  the  Eokoros, 
Esanapes,  Gnacsitares,  and  Mozeemleks  of  Lahontan.  Scep- 
ticism now  succeeded  to  faith  in  the  author's  verity,  and 
neglect  to  the  former  vogue  of  his  works. 

Many  hypotheses  have  been  advanced,  to  account  for 
Lahontan's  wilful  tale.  The  theory  of  interpolation,  some- 
times applied  to  Hennepin,  has  been  suggested  in  this  case; 
but  the  style  of  the  baron's  story  of  his  far  Western  Hypotheses 
tour  is  quite  in  keeping  with  that  of  the  entire  work    ^<iv^°"'*- 

—  Letters  and  Dialogue  carry,  throughout,  the  evidence  of 
coming  from  one  and  the  same  hand.  Others  have  seen  in 
the  narrative  of  the  journey  only  exaggeration  of  possible 
facts,  and  have  sought  to  identify  the  fabulous  waterway  with 
the  St.  Peter's  (present  Minnesota),  whose  latitude  somewhat 
closely  corresponds  with  Lahontan's  River  Long.     The  late 


xl  Introduction 

Elliot  Coues  followed  the  suggestion  of  the  explorer  Nicollet, 
that  the  St.  Peter's,  with  its  principal  affluent  the  Cannon, 
may  be  of  sufficient  length  to  justify  the  baron's  description; 
and  that  this  southward  tributary  being  the  last  to  freeze, 
might  account  for  the  journey  thither  in  the  dead  of  winter. 
Still  others  have  seen  in  the  Moingona  (present  Des  Moines) 
a  river  whose  long,  straight  stretch  from  the  West  may  be 
identical  with  Lahontan's  famous  stream.  Those  who  have 
studied  the  subject  more  carefully  —  such  as  the  baron's  latest 
biographer,  Edmond  Roy — point  out  the  impossibility  of 
reconciling  the  pretended  voyage  with  the  rest  of  the  author's 
descriptions.  They  note  that  upon  leaving  Mackinac  for  the 
West,  the  traveller,  formerly  giving  precise  and  detailed  infor- 
mation as  to  dates  and  routes,  becomes  indistinct.  The  daily 
occurrences  and  episodes  of  a  journey,  that  give  it  an  air  of 
verisimilitude,  are  now  forced  and  betray  invention ;  the  tribes 
encountered  do  not  speak  with  the  same  certain  ring  as  the 
Iroquois  and  Algonquian  savages  whom  the  author  meets 
elsewhere  in  his  travels,  but  have  an  air  of  posing,  while  their 
customs,  manners,  mode  of  government,  and  diplomacy  is 
that  of  imaginary  rather  than  of  real  beings  ;  finally,  by  careful 
calculation  and  comparison  there  is  not  found  available  time 
for  so  extensive  a  voyage  in  birch-bark  canoes. 

In  Roy's  opinion,  the  impecunious  fugitive,  eager  for 
quick  returns,  doubtless  thought  the  unvarnished  record  of  a 
simple  officer  now  in  disgrace,  would  attract  few  buyers  for 
the  volume ;  he  must,  in  order  to  secure  patronage  and 
readers,  pose  as  a  discoverer,  and  imitate  the  achievements  of 


Introduction  xli 

Marquette  and  La  Salle.  Possibly  he  may  have  entertained 
a  distant  hope  of  being  again  despatched  to  his  beloved  wil- 
derness, on  a  mission  of  further  exploration  and  discovery. 
In  the  interior  of  America  he  had  spent  many  days  with 
Perrot  and  Duluth,  who  knew  the  West  as  probably  no  other 
white  men  did.  Out  of  their  reports,  the  published  accounts 
of  Membre,  La  Salle,  Marquette,  and  Hennepin,  and  chance 
information  received  from  the  Indians,  he  may  have  obtained 
the  material  for  the  tale  of  his  marvellous  journey,  and  im- 
posed it  upon  the  public  for  the  sake  of  gain.  That  he  was 
not  incapable  of  such  a  feat,  his  letter  on  the  survivors  of  La 
Salle's  ill-fated  colony,  already  cited,  is  sufficient  proof. 

There  remains  to  be  accounted  for,  his  disposition  of  the 
time  claimed  to  have  been  spent  upon  this  voyage  of  dis- 
covery.     We   have    seen    that    having   abandoned   Fort   St. 
Joseph,  he  arrived  at  Mackinac  in  the  second  week  of  Sep- 
tember, 1688.    It  is  hardly  probable  that  this  uneasy 
spirit   remained   cooped   up   at  that   frontier   post    with  his 
until  his  descent  to  the  colony  the  following  sum- 
mer.    With  his  habits  of  forest  ranging,  his  fondness  for  the 
chase,  his  delight  in  savage  comrades,  it  is  not  difficult  to  see 
how  he  might  have  spent  the  few  months  of  this  interval. 
What  more  probable  than  that  he  joined  a  band  of  Wiscon- 
sin tribesmen  —  probably  Foxes  (Outagami),  from  his  choice 
of  them  as  guides  for  his  pretended  expedition —     .  . 

°  *■  *■  A  journey  to 

returning  from  a  trading  venture  at  Mackinac,  and     Wisconsin 

after  a  winter  in  their  villages  and  hunting  camps 

returned  to  the  French  outpost  in  time  to  descend  with  the 


xlii  Introduction 

season's  convoy  to  Montreal?  This  would  readily  explain  his 
apparent  familiarity  with  the  northwest  shores  of  Lake  Michi- 
gan, with  Green  Bay,  and  the  Fox  River,  and  his  subsequent 
vagueness  in  regard  to  the  Wisconsin  and  the  Mississippi. 

Again,  may  not  the  entire  account  of  the  voyage  to  the 
River  Long,  and  of  the  savage  Arcady  which  he  found  estab- 
lished upon  its  banks,  be  dehberately  part  and  parcel  of  his 
satire    upon    European    customs   and   manners  —  a 

A  satire  on  *  _  t  i  j 

others'  dis-  cynical  rebuke  to  the  credulity  of  the  readmg  world, 
covenes.  ^^^  ^  parody  upon  the  avidity  of  the  explorers  of 
his  day  to  find  a  route  through  the  continent  of  America  to 
the  land  of  the  great  khan  of  Tartary  ?  May  one  not  see  in 
this  an  anticipation  of  Swift,  in  his  more  famous  Gulliver's 
Travels^  and  recognize  in  Lahontan's  fantastic  Eokoros,  Esa- 
napes,  etc.,  the  predecessors  if  not  the  prototypes  of  Lili- 
putians  and  Brobdignagians  ? 

It  fell  to  the  lot  of  this  unfortunate  man,  possessed  of 
keen  powers  of  observation,  a  biting  wit,  a  passion  for  jus- 
tice, and  an  independence  of  mind  and  temper  verging  upon 
Anunfortu-  Hcense,  to  See  his  patrimony  stolen  through  the 
nate  career,  chicanery  of  the  law ;  to  plead  in  vain  for  justice, 
at  the  doors  of  partial  and  corrupt  ministers;  to  be  bound 
to  military  service  in  the  remote  quarters  of  the  world,  and 
thus  for  years  deprived  of  opportunity  to  meet  the  harpies 
who  were  sapping  his  inheritance ;  to  suffer  indignities  at  the 
hands  of  his  superior,  and  injudiciously  flying  the  scene  to 
become  the  victim  of  still  greater  injustice;  to  be  refused 
redress  of  every  sort  at  the  court  of  the  most  powerful  mon- 


Introduction  xliii 

arch  of  his  time,  and  to  be  driven  from  one  court  to  another 
an  exile  and  fugitive,  seeking  patronage  which  was  grudg- 
ingly granted.  It  is  not  surprising  that  even  in  his  earlier 
years  his  wit  turned  caustic,  his  independence  became  caprice, 
his  observation  developed  into  satire,  his  reason  became  cyn- 
icism. Add  to  all  this  an  inconstant  habit  of  mind,  easily 
overcome  by  ennui,  and  a  tendency  to  seek  diversion  in  fan- 
tastic amusements,  in  coarse  and  sensual  pleasures,  in  familiar 
contact  with  social  inferiors  and  with  savages,  and  the  secret 
of  both  Lahontan's  success  and  failure  is  laid  bare. 

During  his  protracted  sea-voyages,  unending  days  in  wil- 
derness garrisons,  and  long  months  of  campaigning  in  gloomy 
forests,  Lahontan  brooded  upon  the  blemishes  of  civilization, 
contrasting   it   caustically  with   the   simplicity  of     „     ^. 

<3  J  1  •'  Brooding    on 

barbarism,  and   erecting  an  ideal  system  of  sav-    the  blemishes 

.  1.11  1  I  •  11         of  civilization. 

age  perfection,  which  he  used  as  a  whip  to  lash 
the  vices  of  his  time.  With  the  European  passion  for  money, 
he  compares  the  communal  life  of  the  North  American  abo- 
rigine who  seeks  to  satisfy  only  his  immediate  needs,  and 
shares  his  possessions  with  whoever  needs  them  ;  over  against 
the  servile  caste  spirit  of  the  courtier,  he  places  the  proud 
independence  of  each  Indian  warrior ;  with  the  rigid  bonds  of 
the  married  state,  he  contrasts  the  easy  libertinism  of  the  bar- 
barian ;  with  the  elaborate  ritual  and  dogmas  of  the  Church, 
the  primitive  nature  myths  of  the  sons  of  the  forest.  Both 
the  legal  and  medical  professions  stand  for  their  share  of  sar- 
casm—  the  flaws  in  French  jurisprudence  are  ruthlessly  thrust 
forth  to  view,  the  ignorance  and  malpractice  of  European 


xHv  Introduction 

physicians  denounced.  The  comforts  and  luxuries  of  civiliza- 
tion are  ridiculed,  while  the  hardships  and  paucity  of  wilderness 
life  are  minimized.  In  short,  to  quote  the  words  of  his  marvel- 
lous Huronian,  Adario, "  The  Great  Spirit  has  vouchfaf'd  us 
an  honefl  Mould,  while  Wickednefs  neftles  in  yours ;  and  that 
he  fends  you  into  our  Country,  in  order  to  have  an  opportu- 
nity of  Correcting  your  Faults,  and  following  our  Example." 
Lahontan's  scorn  of  civilization  and  exaltation  of  savagery, 
culminate  in  the  famous  Dialogue  between  him  and  Adario  — 
The  Dialogue  ^  bit  of  clever  satire  modelled  on  the  Dialogues  of 
with  Adario.  Lucian,  whom  we  have  seen  was  one  of  our  author's 
favorite  classics.  With  vision  as  keen  as  his  Latin  prototype, 
he  scoffs  at  the  hypocrisies,  shams,  corruptions,  and  other  de- 
formities of  the  world  of  the  seventeenth  century,  in  a  manner 
as  bold  and  with  a  wit  as  incisive  as  his  fellow  satirist  of  the 
second.  Nor  do  the  Voyages  lack  Lucian's  obscenity  and 
occasional  indecency — indeed,  this  is  of  so  gross  a  character 
that  some  critics  have  thought  Lahontan,  the  gentleman, 
scholar,  and  officer,  could  hardly  be  guilty  of  it;  deeming  it 
not  unlikely  that  these  touches  were  either  the  additions 
of  the  English  translator  —  the  Dialogue  is  much  more  ex- 
tended in  the  English  than  in  other  editions  —  or  the  emenda- 
tions of  a  certain  unfrocked  and  ribald  French  friar,  Nicolas 
Gueudeville,  also  a  refugee  in  Holland,  and  well  known  as  a 
political  and  religious  satirist,  as  well  as  a  writer  on  geograph- 
ical discoveries.^     Indeed,  some  authorities  have  credited  to 


1  Nicolas  Gueudeville,  the  son  of  a  Rouen  physician,  was  born  about  1650  or  1654 
—  authorities  differ.  Becoming  a  Benedictine  friar,  he  finally  abjured  Catholicism, 
which  necessitated  his  fleeing  at  once  and  taking  refuge  in  Holland,  where  about  1690 


Introduction  xlv 

Gueudeville  the  entire  book  popularly  attributed  to  Lahontan. 
We  are  not,  however,  inclined  to  this  sweeping  judgment, 
believing  that  the  work  bears  throughout  unmistakable  evi- 
dence of  Lahontan's  hand  —  the  philosophy  of  the  satire 
frequently  crops  out  through  the  most  sober  narrative,  and 
the  historical  facts  and  ethnological  Information  are  clearly 
the  product  of  a  man  of  accurate  observation  thoroughly  con- 
versant with  the  facts.  While  it  Is  of  course  quite  possible 
that  Gueudeville  may  have  assisted  In  sharpening  the  weapon, 
we  have  no  direct  evidence  of  this  fact ;  and  there  Is  no 
doubt  that  the  Dialogue  is  quite  In  accord  with  the  spirit  of 
Lahontan,  hence  may  properly  be  treated  as  substantially  the 
latter's  production. 

Two  suggestions  made  by  our  author  deserve  more  than 
passing  remark,  as  showing  still  further  what  manner  of  man 
he  was,  and  how  the  colony  of  New  France  might  have  bene- 
fited from  the  adoption  of  his  plans.    The  first  con- 

Lahontan's 

cerns  the  project  of  garrisoning  the  upper  lakes,  In    plans  of 
order   to    prevent  Iroquois    Incursions    and   British 
trading  ventures.      The  astute  Frontenac  thought  his  young 
friend's  plan  of  sufficient  importance  to  send  the  author  to 


he  married.  His  publications  were  numerous.  For  several  years  he  edited  at  the 
Hague  a  journal  of  political  satire,  V Esprit  des  cours  de  V Europe,  in  which  the  French 
government  was  violently  attacked.  Suppressed  on  the  instigation  of  that  power, 
Gueudeville  revived  the  sheet  under  a  slight  change  of  title,  and  it  enjoyed  a  large  cir- 
culation. In  1704  he  republished  Lahontan's  Dialogue,  at  Amsterdam;  in  1705,  he 
issued  at  Leyden  a  five-volume  encyclopasdia  of  universal  history  ;  in  Amsterdam, 
1713-21,  there  appeared  his  seven-volume  Atlas  historique,  in  which  figured  Lahon- 
tan's River  Long.  His  translations  of  Plautus,  Erasmus,  etc. ,  were  mediocre,  showing 
a  pen  inferior  to  that  of  Lahontan,  who  had  quite  caught  the  classical  style.  Gueude- 
ville appears  to  have  died  about  1721. 


xlvi  Introduction 

propose  it  at  Versailles.  Had  it  been  carried  out  —  the  im- 
portant portages  guarded,  and  the  trade  concentrated  in 
competent  hands  —  it  is  fair  to  presume  that  the  subsequent 
ruinous  Fox  wars  in  Wisconsin  might  have  been  averted,  the 
integrity  of  New  France  preserved,  and  the  English  defied. 
La  Mothe  Cadillac,  developing  one  portion  of  the  plan, 
secured  the  upper  country  for  New  France  for  nearly  sixty 
years. 

Lahontan's  other  project  was,  to  people  the  sparsely- 
settled  colony  with  the  Huguenot  heretics,  whose  energy, 
industry,  and  steadfastness  went  to  the  building  up  of  the 
,   ,    ,       rivals  and   enemies   of  France.      The  short-sighted 

A  plea  for  <=> 

Huguenot  Louis  would  have  greatly  strengthened  his  hold  upon 
America,  had  his  Protestant  population,  expelled 
from  the  mother  land  through  the  revocation  of  the  edict  of 
Nantes,  been  permitted  to  turn  their  steps  toward  Canada. 
Lahontan's  vision  was  in  this  regard,  however,  in  advance  of 
his  contemporaries. 

There  remains  but  to  notice  a  few  of  the  lesser  points  in 
which  Lahontan  shows  his  sagacity,  foresight,  and  purely 
modern  spirit.  In  an  age  of  cruel  punishments,  he  was 
Lahontan's  humane  beyond  his  time.  He  had  no  patience  with 
qualities.  ^^^q  torture  and  cruelty  of  savage  warfare,  and  its 
imitation  by  the  half-barbarized  frontiersmen  of  New  France. 
The  inquisition,  as  studied  by  him  in  Portugal,  he  denounced 
rather  for  its  cruelties  than  its  intolerance.  He  makes  the 
savage  Adario  inveigh  against  taking  testimony  by  means  of 
the  rack.      In  all  this  sensitiveness  to  physical  suffering  he 


Introduction  xlvii 

shows  the  fineness  of  his  spirit,  and  the  delicacy  of  his  organ- 
ization. Moreover,  while  railing  at  the  prevalent  beliefs  of 
his  time,  he  is  not  himself  intolerant ;  he  has  erected  no 
counter  system  of  philosophy  before  which  his  contempo- 
raries must  bow;  he  sees  good  in  various  systems  of  religion, 
laws,  and  government,  even  while  he  satirizes  their  deformities 
and  extravances. 

In  many  ways  Lahontan  was  a  precursor  of  some  of  the 
great  thinkers  of  the  Revolutionary  period  in  France.  His 
was  not  the  spirit  of  his  own  age  —  the  devout  worshiping  of 
supreme  power  as  vested  in  Louis  XIV,  and  of  supreme 
authority  as  resting  in  the  church  of  Rome.  By  Lahontan's 
nature,  Lahontan  was  an  investigator  and  a  critic,  fn'^j^^nce 
No  institution,  no  custom,  no  mode  of  thought  was  of  his  time. 
by  him  accepted  on  faith  or  by  tradition  —  each  must  run  the 
gauntlet  of  his  reasoning  powers,  and  show  its  worth  in  the 
light  of  cold  rationalism.  His  mind  was  passionately  just; 
in  the  midst  of  his  cynicism  he  is  fair  —  even  the  Jesuits 
receive  from  him  their  meed  of  praise  :  he  admits  their  chas- 
tity and  good  works,  while  despising  what  he  deems  their 
prudery  and  bigotry.  Taking  him  as  a  whole,  Lahontan  was 
a  generation  in  advance  of  his  age.  The  Zeitgeist  from  the 
hills  of  the  future  descended  upon  him.  In  his  hatred  and 
scorn  of  the  current  ecclesiasticism  and  despotism,  he  antici- 
pated Rousseau  ;  his  cynical  criticism  of  existing  institutions 
foreshadowed  Voltaire ;  his  exaltation  of  the  virtues  and 
blessings  of  the  savage  state,  preluded  the  Encyclopedists. 
In  the  Discours  sur  VOrigine  et  les  Fondements  de  VInegalite  parmi 


xlviii  Introduction 

les  ommes,  Rousseau  apparently  borrows  many  ideas  from  La- 
hontan's  Dialogue  ;  Chateaubriand's  gentle  barbarian  Atala 
is  brother  to  the  astute  and  charming  Adario. 

We  have  sought  to  reproduce  the  old  text  as  closely  as 
possible,  with  its  typographic  and  orthographic  peculiarities, 
our  wish  being  to  preserve  the  "  atmosphere  "  of  the  original. 
E„ct  It  has,   however,  been   found    advisable   here    and 

reproduction.  ^\^qj.q  ^q  make  a  few  minor  mechanical  changes; 
these  consist  almost  wholly  of  palpable  blemishes,  the  result 
of  negligent  proof-reading  in  the  edition  followed  —  such  as 
turned  letters,  transposed  letters,  slipped  letters,  and  mis- 
spacings.  Such  corrections  have  been  made  without  specific 
mention ;  but  in  some  instances  the  original  errors  have  been 
retained,  and  in  juxtaposition  the  correction  given  within 
braclcets.  Throughout,  we  indicate  the  pagination  of  the  old 
edition  which  we  are  reprinting,  by  inclosing  within  brackets 
the  number  of  each  page  at  its  beginning,  e.  g.  [75]  ;  in  the  one 
instance,  in  the  second  volume,  where  a  page  was,  as  the  fruit 
of  carelessness  in  make-up,  misnumbered  in  the  original,  we 
have  given  the  incorrect  as  well  as  the  correct  figure,  thus : 
[276,  i.  e.  279]. 

In  the  preparation  for  the  press  of  this  reprint  of  the 
original  London  edition  of  1703,  the  Editor  has  had  through- 
out the  valued  cooperation  of  Louise  Phelps  Kellogg,  Ph.  D., 
his  editorial  assistant  on  the  staflF  of  the  Wisconsin 

Aid 

acknowledged.  HistoHcal  Socicty.  He  is  also  under  especial 
obHgations  to  Victor  Hugo  Paltsits,  of  the  Lenox  Branch 


Introduction  xlix 

of  the  New  York  Public  Library,  whose  careful  and  scientific- 
ally constructed  Bibliography  of  Lahontan  was  prepared  for 
the  present  publication.  As  in  the  case  of  Hennepin,  a  year 
ago,  Mr.  Paltsits  has  here  given  us  the  first  accurate  Bibliog- 
raphy of  this  difficult  subject  thus  far  issued. 

R.  G.  T. 
Madison,  Wis.,  October,  1904. 


LAHONTAN  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

By  Victor  Hugo  Paltsits 

^T^HE  path  trodden  by  the  bibHographer  who  undertakes  a  critical 
-*-  study  of  the  various  editions  of  the  voyages  of  the  Baron  de 
Lahontan  is  beset  with  innumerable  stumbling-blocks.  Vagaries  in 
the  books  themselves ;  imperfections  of  extant  or  available  copies  in 
libraries ;  and  the  fact  that  no  complete  series  exists  in  the  libraries  of 
any  single  city  —  all  these  conditions  he  encounters  in  his  investiga- 
tions. He  discovers  also,  by  the  most  painstaking  analysis,  that  others 
who  have  dealt  with  the  subject  have  tabulated  editions  as  extant 
which  never  existed ;  and  that  numerous  errors  have  been  perpetuated 
by  the  shirking  of  independent  research. 

The  bibliography  presented  herewith  has  been  made  from  the 
books  themselves  —  generally  by  testing  the  collations  by  several  copies. 
Only  by  this  method  has  it  been  possible  to  present  an  almost  defini- 
tive work.  Yet,  after  all  the  care  bestowed,  it  is  not  unlikely,  on 
account  of  the  difficulty  of  finding  immaculate  copies  of  certain  edi- 
tions, that  some  plates  or  maps  are  not  here  recorded.  The  books  of 
Lahontan  have  not  been  collected  with  that  avidity  which  we  find 
elsewhere  evident  in  this  collecting  age. 

The  present  bibliography  differs  from  all  of  its  predecessors,  in  that 
it  gives  an  analysis  of  each  volume  by  its  component  parts,  by  its  pagi- 
nation, by  its  signatures,  and  by  the  location  of  its  plates  and  maps. 
This  is,  to  coin  a  new  term,  anatomical  bibliography,  and  follows  an 
idea  which  I  have  sought,  in  several  similar  monographic  studies,  to 


Hi  Lahontan  Bibliography 

introduce  as  a  more  scholarly  method  in  American  bibliography.  Only 
by  such  means  can  the  librarian,  scholar,  or  collector  ascertain  whether 
his  books  are  perfect,  or  wherein  they  lack  completeness.  The  mere 
lumping  of  pagination  or  plates  falls  far  short  of  usefulness ;  it  is, 
indeed,  a  source  of  irritation  and  annoyance. 

In  Henry  Harrisse's  Notes  sur  la  Nouvelle  France  (Paris,  1872), 
nos.  795-803,  a  brief  summary  of  a  few  editions  of  Lahontan's  work 
was  given,  devoid  of  collations  or  other  bibliographical  data.  Joseph 
Sabin,  in  his  Dictionary  of  Books  relating  to  America,  vol.  x.  (1878), 
pp.  27-32,  gave  the  fullest  record  which  was  printed  up  to  his  time; 
but  he  read  into  his  work  non-extant  editions,  and  distorted  the  facts. 
Justin  Winsor  presented  "A  bibliographical  and  critical  note"  to  his 
Narrative  and  Critical  History  of  America ,  vol.  iv.  (1884),  pp.  257- 
262 ;  it  is,  however,  a  more  or  less  inaccurate  and  incomplete  sum- 
mary. James  Constantine  Pilling  was  the  first  bibliographer  to  get  at 
all  a  proper  grasp  of  the  subject,  in  his  Bibliography  of  the  Algonquian 
Languages  (Washington,  1891),  pp.  288-295,  with  seven  facsimile  title- 
pages  of  the  1703  French  editions.  He  made  some  mistakes,  which 
reappeared  in  Roy  and  Dionne,  who  drew  almost  bodily  from  him. 
J.  Edmond  Roy  appended  a  bibliography  to  his  otherwise  very  impor- 
tant work  on  "  Le  Baron  de  Lahontan,"  published  in  the  Proceedings 
and  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Canada  for  1894,  section  i.  His 
monograph  is  divided  into  the  following  divisions:  "  Avant-propos," 
pp.  63-64 ;  genealogy  and  biography  of  Lahontan,  pp.  64-109 ;  exam- 
ination and  critique  of  Lahontan's  book,  pp.  109-165  ;  "  Pieces  Justifi- 
catives"  (documents),  pp.  166-179;  "  Notes  sur  les  diverses  Editions 
des  Ouvrages  de  Lahontan,"  pp.  179-192.  There  is  also  a  separate 
issue  of  his  work  from  the  "  Proceedings,"  with  its  own  printed 
wrapper.  Phileas  Gagnon,  in  his  Essai  de  Bibliographie  Canadienne 
(Quebec,  1895),  item  1922,  summarized  the  bibliography  of  Lahontan 


Lahontan  Bibliography  liii 

in  about  ten  lines.  Narcisse  E.  Dionne  is  the  latest  bibliographer  of 
the  subject,  in  Le  Courrier  du  Livre  (Quebec:  Raoul  Renault,  1899), 
vol.  iii,  pp.  313-326.  His  work  is  merely  a  compilation  from  former 
bibliographies  and  sale-catalogues,  presents  nothing  original,  and  is 
uncritical. 

In  the  present  account,  the  abbreviated  designation  for  the  location 
of  copies  is  explained  by  the  following  key: 

B  =  Boston  Public  Library. 

BA  =  Boston  Athenaeum. 

BE  =  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  Washington,  D.  C. 

BM  =  British  Museum,  London. 

BN  =  Bibliotheque  Nationale,  Paris. 

C  =  Library  of  Congress,  Washington,  D.  C. 

HC  =  Harvard  College  Library,  Cambridge,  Mass. 

JCB  =  John  Carter  Brown  Library,  Providence,  R.  L 

LLQ  =  Legislative  Library,  Quebec. 

LP  =  Library  of  Parliament,  Ottawa. 

LU  =  Laval  University,  Quebec. 

MHS  =  Massachusetts  Historical  Society,  Boston. 

NL  =  New  York  Public  Library  (Lenox  Library  Building). 

NYHS  =  New  York  Historical  Society,  New  York  City. 

WHS  =  Wisconsin  Historical  Society,  Madison. 

The  arrangement  pursued  is  chronological,  by  the  imprint  date  of 
each  volume  ;  when  the  volumes  of  an  edition  bear  the  same  date  they 
are  placed  sequentially  under  that  particular  year.  Each  volume,  in 
fact,  has  for  identification  its  own  earmarks. 

It  is  a  pleasure  to  acknowledge  the  special  facilities  afforded  by 
librarians  in  the  prosecution  of  this  work,  and  particularly  to  Mr. 
George  Parker  Winship,  librarian  of  the  Carter  Brown  Library,  and 
Dr.  Herbert  Putnam,  Librarian  of  Congress. 


liv  Lahontan  Bibliography 

1703  —  French  :  Angel  issue  —  Vol.  i. 

Nouveaux  |  Voyages  |  de  I  Mr.  le  Baron  de  Lahontan,  |  dans  I 
TAmerique  |  Septentrionale,  |  Qui  contiennent  une  relation  des  dif- 
ferens  Peuples  |  qui  y  habitent ;  la  nature  de  leur  Gouvernement ; 
leur  I  Commerce,  leurs  Coutumes,  leur  Religion,  &  |  leur  maniere  de 
faire  la  Guerre.  |  L'interet  des  Franfois  &  des  Anglois  dans  le  Com-  | 
merce  qu'ils  font  avec  ces  Nations ;  I'avantage  que  |  I'Angleterre  peut 
retirer  dans  ce  Pais,  etant  |  en  Guerre  avec  la  France.  |  Le  tout  enrichi 
de  Cartes  &  de  Figures.  I  Tome  Premier.  I  [Emblematic  circular  cut  of 
Angel,  etc.,  with  inscription  underneath^  | 

A  La  Haye,  |  Chez  les  Freres  I'Honore,  Marchands  Libraires.  | 
M.  D  c  c  III.  I 

Collation.  —  i2mo;  title,  verso  blank;  "A  sa  Majeste  Frederic  IV," 
pp.  (4);  "Preface,"  pp.  (7);  "Table  des  Lettres  du  Tome  I,"  pp.Cg); 
"  Voyages  "  or  text,  pp.  1-266  ;  "Explication  de  quelques  Termes  qui 
se  trouvent  dans  le  premier  tome,"  pp.  267-279 ;  verso  of  p.  279  blank. 
No  mispaging.  The  2d,  4th,  6th,  8th,  12th,  and  17th  lines  and  place 
and  date  of  imprint  printed  in  red. 

Plates.  —Opposite  pp.  34,  46,  72,  85,  98,  116,  141,  174,  2ii,  226, 
and  242 ;  three  frontispieces,  namely,  a  globe  and  bird  in  a  circle,  an 
Indian  in  an  oval  with  superscription  "Et  leges  et  sceptra  terit,"  and  a 
small  "Carte  generale  de  Canada  a  petit  point;"  also  a  large  folded 
"Carte  que  le  Gnacsitares  ont  dessine,"  etc.,  found  sometimes  opp. 
p.  I,  but  intended  for  p.  136.  In  the  preface  of  this  volume  the  fol- 
lowing note  appears:  "La  Carte  mise  a  la  tete  du  premier  Volume 
doit  se  raporter  a  la  16.  Lettre  du  meme  Volume." 

Signatures.  —  *  in  eleven,  A — L  in  twelves,  M  in  eight.  Sig.  I5 
printed  correctly. 

Copies.  —  BM,  JCB  (the  Globe  and  Indian  frontispieces  mounted), 


Lahontan  Bibliography  \y 

NL  (two,  one  in  perfect  condition,  and  one  lacking  Globe  and  Indian 
frontispieces;  both  copies  bound  in  contemporary  hogskin),  NYHS 
(imperfect  and  otherwise  a  poor  copy). 

1703  —  French:  Angelissue  —  Vol.  2. 

Memoires  |  de  |  TAmerique  |  Septentrionale,  |  ou  la  Suite  |  des 
Voyages  de  Mr.  le  |  Baron  de  Lahontan.  |  Qui  contiennent  la  De- 
fcription  d'une  grande  eten-  I  due  de  Pais  de  ce  Continent,  I'interet 
des  Francois  &  des  1  Anglois,  leurs  Commerces,  leurs  Navigations,  | 
les  Moeurs  &  les  Coutumes  des  Sauvages  &c.  |  Avec  un  petit  Diction- 
aire  de  la  Langue  du  Pais.  |  Le  tout  enrichi  de  Cartes  &  de  Figures.  | 
Tome  Second.  |   \_Same  cut  as  in  first  volume]  \ 

A  La  Haye,  |  Chez  les  Freres  I'Honore,  Marchands  Libraires.  | 
M.  DCCIII.  I 

Collation.  —  i2mo;  title,  verso  blank;  "Memoires,"  pp.  3-194; 
half-title:  "Petit  I  Dictionaire  |  de  la  Langue  |  des  Sauvages,"  on  p. 
[195];  P-  [196]  blank;  "  Petit  Dictionaire,"  pp.  197-220;  "Table  des 
Matieres  contenues  dans  les  deux  tomes,"  pp.  (16).  P.  219  is  mis- 
paged  29.  The  1st,  3d,  6th,  7th,  12th,  and  14th  lines  and  place  and 
date  of  imprint  printed  in  red. 

P/^/fj.  —  Opposite  pp.  95,  125,  133,  148,  155,  160,  185,  187,  188, 
189,  and  191 ;  a  large  folded  "  Carte  generale  de  Canada  Dediee  au  roy. 
de  Danemark,"  opp.  p.  3  ;  two  frontispieces,  namely,  a  globe  and  bird 
in  a  circle,  and  an  Indian  in  an  oval,  exactly  like  these  two  cuts  in  the 
first  volume  of  this  issue. 

Signatures. —  A — I  in  twelves,  K  in  ten. 

Copies.  —  BM.  JCB  (the  Globe  and  Indian  frontispieces  mounted), 
NL  (two,  one  in  perfect  condition,  and  one  lacking  Globe  and  Indian 
frontispieces),  NYHS  (imperfect  and  otherwise  a  poor  copy). 


Ivi  Lahontan  Bibliography 

1703  —  French  :  Angel  issue  —  Vol.  3. 

Suple'ment  |  aux  Voyages  |  du  |  Baron  de  Lahontan,  |  Ou  Ton 
trouve  des  Dialogues  curieux  |  entre  |  I'Auteur  |  et  |  un  Sauvage  | 
De  bon  fens  qui  a  voyage.  |  L'on  y  voit  aufli  plufieurs  Obfervations 
faites  par  le  meme  |  Auteur,  dans  (es  Voyages  en  Portugal,  en  Efpagne, 
I  en  Hollande,  &  en  Dannemarck,  &c.  |  Tome  Troisie'me.  1  Avec 
Figures.  |   {^Same  cut  as  in  vols.  I  and  2  of  Angel  issue\   \ 

A  La  Haye,  |  Chez  les  Freres  I'Honore,  Marchands  Libraires.  | 
M.  DCC.  III.  I 

Collation. —  i2mo;  title,  verso  blank;  "Preface,"  pp.  (12);  "Avis 
De  I'Auteur,  Au  Lecteur,"  pp.  (2);  "Dialogues  Ou  Entretiens  entre 
un  Sauvages,  Et  le  Baron  de  Lahontan,"  pp.  1-103 ;  p.  [104]  blank; 
half-title:  "Voyages  |  Du  |  Baron  de  Lahontan  |  En  |  Portugal,  | 
Et  en  I  Danemarc,"  on  p.  [105];  p.  [106]  blank;  "Voyages  De 
Portugal,  Et  de  Danemarc,"  pp.  107-222.  P.  86  is  mispaged  89. 
Title-page  printed  wholly  in  black. 

Plates.  —  Folded  plates  at  pp.  i,  118,  149,  and  155  ;  folded  maps  of 
Portugal  and  Denmark,  by  N.  de  Fer,  opp.  pp.  107  and  145,  respectively. 

Signatures.  — *  in  eight,  A — I  in  tv^^elves,  K  in  three  (some  copies 
have  a  blank  leaf  to  complete  the  last  signature  in  four) . 

Copies.  — BM,  JCB,  LP. 

1 703  —  French  :  Ornament  issue  —  Vol.  i . 
Nouveaux  |  Voyages  |  de  |  M""  le    Baron   de   Lahontan,  |  dans  | 
I'Amerique  1  Septentrionale,  |  Qui  contiennent  une  Relation   des  dif- 
ferens  |  Peuples  qui  y  habitent ;   la  nature  de  leur  |  Gouvernement ; 
leur  Commerce,  leurs  Coil-  I  tumes,  leur  Religion,  &  leur  maniere  de  | 
faire  la  Guerre.  |  L'interet  des  Fran? ois  &  des  Anglois  dans  le  Commer- 
I  ce  qu'ils  font  avec  ces  Nations;  I'avantage  que  |  I'Angleterre  peut 


Lahontan  Bibliography  Ivii 

retirer  dans  ce  Pais,  etant  |  en  Guerre  avec  la  France.  |  Le  tout  enrichi 
de  Cartes  &  de  Figures.  |  Tome  Premier.  |   \_Ornament]   \ 

A  La  Haye,  |  Chez  les  Freres  rHoncre,  Marchands  Libraires.  | 
M.  DCIII.   I 

Collation.  —  i2mo ;  title,  verso  blank  ;  "  A  sa  Majeste  Frederic  IV," 
pp.  (4);  "  Preface,"  pp.  (7);  "  Table  des  Lettres  du  Tome  I,"  pp.  (11); 
"  Voyages  "  or  text,  pp.  1-266  ;  "  Explication  de  quelques  Termes  qui 
se  trouvent  dans  le  premier  tome,"  pp.  267-279;  verso  of  p.  279  blank. 
Pp.  35,  82,  98,  123,  128,  177,  241,  and  242  are  mispaged  34,  84,  78, 
133,  126,  176,  242,  and  142,  respectively.  The  2d,  4th,  6th,  8th  to 
I2th,  and  i8th  lines  and  place  and  date  of  imprint  printed  in  red. 

Plates.  — Frontispiece  and  opposite  pp.  14,  34,  47,  72,  85,  98,  116, 
141,  155  (really  belongs  in  second  volume  at  that  page),  174,  225,  and 
242;  a  small  "Carte  generale  du  Canada  en  petit  point,"  opp.  p.  9, 
and  folded  "Carte  que  les  Gnacsitares  ont  Dessine,"  etc.,  at  p.  136. 

Signatures.  —  *  in  tvsrelve,  A — L  in  tvi^elves,  M  in  eight.  Sig.  I5  is 
misprinted  I3. 

Copies.—  B,  BA,  JCB,  MHS. 

1703  —  French  :   Ornament  issue  —  Vol.  2. 

Memoires  |  de  |  I'Amerique  |  Septentrionale,  |  ou  la  Suite  des 
Voyages  |  de  |  M""  le  Baron  de  Lahontan.  1  Qui  contiennent  la  De- 
fcription  d'une  grande  |  etendue  de  Pais  de  ce  Continent,  I'interet  | 
des  Franf  ois  &  des  Anglois,  leurs  Com-  |  merces,  leurs  Navigations,  les 
Moeurs  &  1  les  CoQtumes  des  Sauvages  &c.  |  Avec  un  petit  Diction- 
naire  de  la  Langue  du  Pais.  |  Le  tout  enrichi  de  Cartes  &  de  Figures.  | 
Tome  Second.  |  [Ornament]   \ 

A  La  Haye,  |  Chez  les  Freres  I'Honore,  Marchands  Libraires.  | 
M.  DCCIII.   I 


Iviii  Lahontan  Bibliography 

Collation.  — i2mo;  title,  verso  blank;  "  Memoires,"  pp.  3-194 
(mispaged  164);  half-title:  "Petit  |  Dictionaire  |  de  la  Langue  |  des 
Sauvages,"on  p.  [195];  p.  [196]  blank;  "  Petit  Dictionaire,"  pp.  197" 
220;  'Table  des  Matieres  contenues  dans  les  deux  tomes,"  pp.  (17), 
verso  of  last  leaf  blank;  one  blank  leaf  to  complete  sig.  K.  Pp.  167, 
169,  175,  194  and  219  are  mispaged  761,  269,  375,  164,  and  26,  respec- 
tively. The  ist,  3d,  5th,  7th,  13th,  and  15th  lines  and  place  and  date 
of  imprint  printed  in  red. 

P/fl/^j.  —  Opposite  pp.  55,  95,  loi,  125,  130,  151,  i74,  189,  190,  and 
191  ;  a  "  Carte  generale  de  Canada,"  opp.  p.  5. 

Signatures.  —  A— K  in  twelves,  the  last  leaf  blank.  D3  is  printed  in 
small  cap.,  and  F3  is  misprinted  F2.  The  small  printer's  ornament,  or 
fleuron,  differs  in  size  from  that  of  the  first  volume  of  this  issue. 

Coi>w.-B,  BA,  JCB,  MHS. 

1 703  —  French  :  Globe  issue  —  Vol.  i  . 

Nouveaux  |  Voyages  |  de  |  M*"  le  Baron  de  Lahontan,  1  dans  | 
I'Amerique  1  Septentrionale,  |  Qui  contiennent  une  relation  des  dif- 
ferens  Peuples  |  qui  y  habitent ;  la  nature  de  leur  Gouvernement ;  | 
leur  Commerce,  leur  Coutumes,  leur  Reli-  |  gion,  &  leur  maniere  de 
faire  la  Guerre.  |  L'interet  des  Francois  &  des  Anglois  dans  le  Com- 
mer-  |  ce  qu'ils  font  avec  ces  Nations ;  I'avantage  que  1  I'Angleterre 
peut  retirer  dans  ce  Pais,  etant  |  en  Guerre  avec  la  France.  |  Le  tout 
enrichi  de  Cartes  &  de  Figures.  |  Tome  Premier.  1  iCut  of  a  globe]   \ 

A  La  Haye,  |  Chez  les  Freres  I'Honore.  Marchands  Libraire  [sic] 

I   M.  DCCIII.   I 

Collation.  —  i2mo ;  collation  the  same  as  the  "Ornament  "  issue  of 
the  same  year,  with  similar  mispaging  and  signatures. 

Plate.  —  The  plate  for  p.  155  is  sometimes  found  in  this  volume, 
but  really  belongs  in  the  second  volume.     The  title-pages  of  both  vol- 


Lahontan  Bibliography  lix 

umes  of  this  "  Globe  "  issue  are  printed  entirely  in  black  ink,  and  the 
plates  are  superior  to  those  in  the  "  Ornament  "  issue.  The  "  Globe  " 
issue  has  corrections  in  the  place-nomenclature  on  the  maps,  and  some 
additions  of  places  on  these  maps  have  also  been  noticed.  The  "  Orna- 
ment "  issue  has  fancy  initial  letters,  head  and  tail  pieces,  while  the 
"  Globe  "  issue  is  simpler  in  this  respect ;  but  the  two  issues  agree  typo- 
graphically as  to  text,  even  in  broken  letters  and  singular  mispaging. 
Copies.  —  BA,  C,  LLQ,  LU,  NL. 

1 703  —  French  :  Globe  issue  —  Vol.  2. 

Memoires  |  de  |  I'Amerique  |  Septentrionale,  |  ou  la  Suite  des 
Voyages  |  de  1  IVP  le  Baron  de  Lahontan.  |  Qui  contiennent  la  De- 
fcription  d'une  grande  etendue  de  |  Pais  de  ce  Continent,  interet  des 
Francois  &  des  |  Anglois,  leurs  Commerces,  leurs  Navigations,  les  | 
Moeurs  &  les  Coutumes  des  Sauvages,  &c.  |  Avec  un  petit  Dictionnaire 
de  la  Langue  du  Pais.  |  Le  tout  enrichi  de  Cartes  &  de  Figures.  | 
Tome  Second.  |   \_Cut  of  a  globe]  \ 

A  La  Haye,  |  Chez  les  Freres  I'Honore,  Marchand  [sic]  Libraires. 

I   M.  DCCIII.  I 

Collation.  —  i2mo.  The  plate  which  is  found  in  the  "  Ornament  " 
issue  of  this  volume  opposite  p.  55  is  properly  placed  at  p.  155  in  this 
"  Globe  "  issue. 

Plates.  —  "Lac  des  Outagamis  "  and  another  plate  containing  a 
bow,  hatchet,  etc.,  and  scenes  in  Indian  warfare  and  cruelty,  are  not 
found  similarly  located  in  several  copies  examined ;  the  former  appears 
to  belong  opp.  p.  165,  and  the  latter  opp.  p.  174. 

Signatures.  —  Some  copies  have  p.  2i8  misprinted  418,  and  the  sig- 
nature mark  D3  is  not  printed  in  small  caps,  as  in  the  "Ornament" 
issue,  but  sig.  F3  is  misprinted  F2. 

Copies.  —  BA,  C,  LLQ,  LU,  NL. 


Ix  Lahontan  Bibliography 

1703  —  English  —  Vol.  i.^ 
New  1  Voyages  I  to  I  North-America.  |  Containing  I  An  Account 
of  the  feveral  Nations  of  that  vaft  Con-  |  tinent ;  their  Cufloms,  Com- 
merce, and  Way  of  |  Navigation  upon  the  Lakes  and  Rivers ;  the  feve- 

I  ral  Attempts  of  the  Englifh  and  French  to  difpoffefs  |  one  another ; 
with  the  Reafons  of  the  Mifcarriage  |  of  the  former ;  and  the  various 
Adventures  be-  |  tween  the  French,  and  the  Iroquefe  Confederates  of  | 
England,  from  1683  to  1694.  I  ^  Geographical  Defcription  of  Canada, 
and  a  Natu-  |  ral  Hiflory  of  the  Country,  with  Remarks  upon  |  their 
Government,  and  the  Interefl  of  the  Englifh  |  and  French  in  their 
Commerce.  |  Alfo  a  Dialogue  between  the  Author  and  a  General  of 
the  I  Savages,  giving  a  full  View  of  the  Religion  and  flrange  |  Opin- 
ions of  thofe  People :  With  an  Account  of  the  Au-  |  thors  Retreat  to 
Portugal  and  Denmark  and  his  Remarks  |  on  thofe  Courts.  |  To 
which  is  added,  |  A  Dictionary  of  the  Algonkine  Language,  which  is 
generally  |  fpoke  in  North-America.  |  lUuftrated  with  Twenty  Three 
Mapps  and  Cutts.  I  Written  in  French  |  By  the  Baron  Lahontan, 
Lord  Lievtenant  |  of  the  French  Colony  at  Placentia  in  New-  | 
foundland,  now  in  England.  |  Done  into  Englifh.  |  In  Two  Volumes. 

I  A  great  part  of  which  never  Printed  in  the  Original.  | 

London:   Printed  for  H.  Bonwicke  in  St.  Paul's  Church-yard;  | 
T.  Goodwin,  M.  Wotton,  B.  Tooke,  in  Fleetflreet ;  and  S.  Manfhip 

I  in  Cornhil,  1703.  I 

Collation.  — Svo;  title,  verso  blank;  "To  His  Grace  William 
Duke  of  Devonshire,"  pp.  (2);  "The  Preface,"  pp.  (8);  "  The  Con- 
tents," pp.  (12);  "Some  New  Voyages"  pp.  1-202 ;  "Memoirs  of 
North-America,"  pp.  203-274 ;  "A  Table  explaining  some  Terms 
made  use  of  in  both  Volumes,"  pp.  275-280;  "Books  lately  Printed, 


1  This  is  the  original  English  edition  which  is  herewith  reprinted. 


Lahontan  Bibliography  Ixi 

&c.,"  p.  (i);  one  blank  page.  No  mispaging.  The  "  Table"  ends 
in  the  midst  of  the  letter  "T"  on  p.  280,  and  there  is  a  superfluous 
catch-word  "  THE  "  at  the  foot  of  that  page. 

P/a/w.  —  Opposite  pp.  26,  43,  55,  65,  75,  89,  106,  160,  184  and 
225  (map  of  Newfoundland);  a  small  full-page  map  of  Canada  to  face 
the  title-page,  and  two  large  folded  maps  to  face  p.  i,  as  follows  :  (A) 
"  A  General  Map  of  New  France  Com,  call'd  Canada,"  (B)  "A  Map 
drawn  upon  Stag-skins  byy^  Gnacfitares,"  etc. 

Signatures.  —  A  in  eight,  a  in  four,  B — S  in  eights,  T  in  four,  and 
one  advertisement  leaf. 

Copies.— B,  HC,  JCB,  MHS,  NL  (three),  WHS. 

The  following  extract  from  the  preface  of  this  volume  is  worthy  of 
notice  here : 

While  my  Book  was  a  Printing  in  Holland,  I  was  in  England  ;  and  as  soon 
as  it  appear'd,  several  English  Gentlemen  of  a  distinguishing  Merit,  who  understand 
the  French  as  well  as  their  Mother  Tongue,  gave  me  to  know,  that  they  would  be 
glad  to  see  a  more  ample  Relation  of  the  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  People  of  that 
Continent,  whom  we  call  by  the  name  of  Savages.  This  oblig'd  me  to  communicate 
to  these  Gentlemen,  the  substance  of  the  several  Conferences  I  had  in  that  Country 
with  a  certain  Huron,  whom  the  French  call  Rat.  While  I  stay'd  at  that  American's 
Village,  I  imploy'd  my  time  very  agreeably  in  making  a  careful  Collection  of  all  his 
Arguments  and  Opinions  ;  and  as  soon  as  I  return'd  from  my  Voyage  upon  the  Lakes 
of  Canada,  I  shew'd  my  Manuscript  to  Count  Frontenac,  who  was  so  pleas'd  with  it, 
that  he  took  the  pains  to  assist  me  in  digesting  the  Dialogues,  and  bringing  them  into 
the  order  they  now  appear  in  :  For  before  that,  they  were  abrupt  Conferences  without 
Connexion.  Upon  the  Solicitation  of  these  English  Gentlemen,  I've  put  these  Dia- 
logues into  the  hands  of  the  Person  who  translated  my  Letters  and  Memoirs  :  And  if 
it  had  not  been  for  their  pressing  Instances,  they  had  never  seen  the  light  ;  for  there 
are  but  few  in  the  World  that  will  judge  impartially,  and  without  prepossession,  of 
some  things  contained  in  'em. 

I  have  likewise  intrusted  the  same  Translator  with  some  Remarks  that  I  made 
in  Portugal,  and  Denmark,  when  I  fled  thither  from  Newfound-Land.  There  the 
Reader  will  meet  with  a  description  of  Lisbon  and  Copenhagen,  and  of  the  capital 
City  of  Arragon. 

To  the  Translation  of  my  first  Volume,  I  have  added  an  exact  Map  of  Newfound- 
Land,  which  was  not  in  the  Original.     I  have  likewise  corrected  almost  all  the  Cuts 


Ixii  Lahontan  Bibliography 

of  the  Holland  Impression,  for  the  Dutch  Gravers  had  murder'd  'em,  by  not  under- 
standing their  Explications,  which  were  all  in  French.  They  have  grav'd  Women  for 
Men,  and  Men  for  Women  ;  naked  Persons  for  those  that  are  cloath'd,  and  e  Contra. 
As  for  the  Maps,  the  Reader  will  find  'em  very  exact ;  And  I  have  taken  care  to  have 
the  Tracts  of  my  Voyages  more  nicely  delineated,  than  in  the  Original. 


1703  — English  — Vol.  2. 

New  I  Voyages  |  to  |  North-America.  |  Giving  a  full  Account  of 
the  Cuftoms,  |  Commerce,  Religion,  and  ftrange  O-  |  pinions  of  the 
Savages  of  that  Country.  |  With  |  Political  Remarks  upon  the  Courts 
I  of  Portugal  and  Denmark,  and  the  Prefent  |  State  of  the  Commerce 
of  thofe  Countries.  |  Never  Printed  before.  |  Written  |  By  the  Baron 
Lahontan,  Lord  |  Lieutenant  of  the  French  Colony  at  |  Placentia  in 
Newfoundland :  Now  in  |  England.  |  Vol.  IL  | 

London :  |  Printed  for  H.  Bonwicke  in  St.  Paul's  Church-yard ; 
T.  Goodwin,  |  M.  Wotton,  B.  Tooke  in  Fleetftreet ;  and  S.  Manfhip 
in  Cornhil,  |  1703.  | 

Collation.  —  8vo ;  title,  verso  blank;  "A  Discourse,"  pp.  1-89; 
"A  Conference  or  Dialogue,"  pp.  90-183;  p.  [184]  blank;  "An  Ap- 
pendix, Containing  Some  New  Voyages  to  Portugal  and  Denmark," 
pp.  185-286;  "A  Short  Dictionary  Of  the  most  Universal  Language 
of  the  Savages,"  pp.  287-302 ;  "The  Index,"  pp.  (13);  one  blank 
page.  The  second  figure  of  the  paging  of  p.  43  is  inverted  and  p.  279 
is  misprinted  276.  Sets  of  this  edition  are  usually  very  much  mixed  up 
in  the  arrangement  of  the  preliminary  and  end  leaves,  and  the  majority 
of  copies  examined  lacked  the  frontispiece  to  the  second  volume. 

Plates.  —  Frontispiece  containing  an  Indian  within  an  oval,  having 
the  superscription  "  Et  Leges  et  Sceptra  terit  ";  and  opposite  pp.  5,  29, 
36,  51,  59  (two),  80,  82,  84  and  86. 

Signatures.  —  Title-page,  Aa — Sf  in  eights,  Tt  in  seven,  Vv  in  seven. 


Lahontan  Bibliography  Ixiii 

Copies. — B  (with  frontispiece),  HC  (lacks  front.),  JCB  (with 
front.),  MHS  (lacks  front.),  NL  (two,  both  lack  front.),  WHS  (lacks 
front.). 

1704— French  — Vol.  i. 

Nouveaux  |  Voyages  |  de  Mr  le  Baron  |  de  Lahontan  |  dans  | 
I'Amerique  |  Septentrionale.  |  Qui  contiennent  une  relation  des  dif- 
ferens  Peu-  |  pies  qui  y  habitent,  la  nature  de  leur  Gouver-  |  nement, 
leur  Commerce,  leur  Coutume,  leur  |  Religion,  &  leur  maniere  de  faire 
la  Guerre.  |  L'interet  des  Franfois  &  des  Anglois  dans  le  |  Commerce 
qu'ils  font  avec  ces  Nations,  I'a-  |  vantage  que  I'Angleterre  peut  retirer 
dans  ce  |  Pais,  etant  en  Guerre  avec  la  France.  |  Le  tout  enrichi  de 
Cartes  &  de  Figures.  |  Tome  Premier.  |   [Small  ornament}   | 

A  La  Haye,  |  Chez  les  Freres  Lhonore',  Marchands  Libraires.  | 
M.  DCCIV.   I 

Collation.  —  i2mo  ;  title,  verso  blank  ;  "  A  sa  Majeste  Frederic  IV," 
pp.  (2);  "  Preface,"  pp.  (5);  "  Table  desLettres  du  L  Tome,"  pp.  (9); 
"Voyages,"  pp.  1-266;  "Explication  de  quelques  Termes,"  pp.  267- 
280.     P.  82  is  misprinted  84.     The  title-page  printed  wholly  in  black. 

Plates.  —  Frontispiece  of  an  Indian  in  an  oval,  and  opposite  pp.  14, 
34,  47,  72,  85,  98,  116,  141,  174,  225  and  242;  a  small  "Carte 
generale  du  Canada  en  petit  point "  opp.  p.  i  of  the  text ;  a  folded  map 
opp.  p.  136,  entitled:    "Carte  que  les  Gnacsitares  ont  Dessine,"  etc. 

Signatures. —  A — M  in  twelves,  N  in  six  (the  last  leaf  blank). 
Sig.  E5  is  misprinted  Ee. 

Copies.— JCB,  LP. 

1704  —  French  — Vol.  2. 

Memoires  |  de  |  I'Amerique  |  Septentrionale,  |  ou  |  la  Suite  des 
Voyages  |  de  |  Mr  le  Baron  de  Lahontan.  |  Qui  contiennent  la  De- 


Ixiv  Lahontan  Bibliography 

fcription  d'une  |  grande  etendue  de  pais  de  ce  Conti-  |  nent,  Pinteret  des 
Francois  &  des  An-  |  glois,  leurs  Commerces,  leurs  Na-  |  vigations,  les 
Moeurs  &  les  Coutu-  |  mes  des  Sauvages,  &c.  |  Avec  un  petit  Diction- 
naire  de  la  Langue  du  Pais.  |  Le  tout  enrichi  de  Cartes  &  de  Figures.  | 
Et  augmente  dans  ce  (econd  Tome  de  la  ma-  |  niere  dont  les  Sauvages 
fe  regalent.  |   [Small  ornament,  same  as  in  vol.  /]  | 

A  La  Haye,  |  Chez  les  Freres  Lhonore',  Marchands  Libraires.  | 
M.  DCCIV.  I 

Collation. — 8vo;  title,  verso  blank;  "Memoires,"  pp.  3-198; 
"Petit  Dictionaire,"  pp.  199-222;  "Table  des  Matieres,"  pp.  (18). 
Pagination  of  p.  loi  imperfectly  printed  10.  Title-page  printed  wholly 
in  black. 

Plates.  —  Opposite  pp.  95,  98,  lOi,  125,  130.  I5i.  I55>  167,  185, 
189,  190,  and  191;  a  folded  "Carte  generale  de  Canada"  opp.  p.  5. 

Signatures.  —  A — K  in  twelves. 

Copies.  — ]CB,  LP. 

1704  —  French  —  Vol.  3. 

Suite  I  Du  I  Voyage,  |  De  I'Amerique,  |  Ou  Dialogues  |  De  Mon- 
fieur  le  |  Baron  de  Lahontan  |  Et  d'un  |  Sauvage,  |  Dans  I'Amerique. 
Contenant  une  defcription  |  exacte  des  moeurs  &  des  coutumes  de  ces 
I  Peuples  Sauvages.  |  Avec  les  Voyages  du  meme  en  Portgugal  &  en  | 
Danemarc,  dans  lefquels  on  trouve  des  parti-  |  cularitez  tres  curieufes, 
&  qu'on  n'avoit  1  point  encore  remarquees.  |  Le  tout  enrichi  de  Cartes 
&  de  Figures.  |   \_Small  scrolled  ornament^  \ 

A  Amsterdam,  |  Chez  la  Veuve  de  Boeteman,  |  Et  fe  vend  |  A 
Londres,  chez  David  Mortier,  Li-  |  braire  dans  le  Strand,  a  I'Enfeigne 
d'Erafme.  |  M.  DCCIV.  | 

Collation.  —  i2mo;  title,  verso  blank;  "  Preface,"  pp.  (12);  "Avis 


Lahontan  Bibliography  Ixv 

De  I'Auteur  Au  Lecteur,"  pp.  (2);  "Dialogues,"  pp.  1-103;  p.  [104] 
blank;  half-title:  "Voyages  |  Du  |  Baron  de  Lahontan  |  En  Por- 
tugal, I  Et  en  I  Danemarc,"  on  p.  [105];  p.  [106]  blank;  text  of 
"Voyages,"  pp.  107-222.  P.  86  is  mispaged  89.  The  ist,  3d,  5th, 
7th,  and  9th  lines  and  place  of  imprint  printed  in  red. 

Plates.  — Opposite  pp.  i,  118,  149,  and  155;  a  map  of  Portugal  at 
p.  107,  and  a  map  of  Denmark  at  p.  145. 

Signatures.  —  *  in  eight,  A — I  in  twelves,  K  in  three.  This  volume 
is  merely  a  reissue  of  the  original  sheets  of  the  1703  edition  of  the  Supl'e- 
ment,  with  a  new  title-page.  We  have  seen  sets  of  the  "Angel  issue  " 
of  vols.  I  and  2  accompanied  by  the  1703  edition  of  the  Supl'ement ;  by  the 
1704  Suite,  and  by  the  issue  of  1704  called  Dialogues  {vide  next  item). 

Copies.  —  LLQ,  NL. 

1704  —  French  :  Dialogues  issue  —  Vol.  3. 

Dialogues  |  De  Monfieur  le  |  Baron  de  Lahontan  |  Et  d'un  | 
Sauvage,  |  Dans  I'Amerique.  |  Contenant  une  defcription  exacte  des 
moeurs  |  &  des  coutumes  de  ces  Peuples  Sauvages.  |  Avec  les  Voyages 
du  meme  en  Portugal  &  en  |  Danemarc,  dans  lefquels  on  trouve  des 
parti-  I  cularitez  tres  curieuses,  &  qu'on  n'avoit  |  point  encore  remar- 
quees.  |  Le  tout  enrichi  de  Cartes  &  de  Figures.  |   \_Cut,  a  vase  of  flowers\ 

A  Amsterdam,  |  Chez  la  Veuve  de  Boeteman,  |  Et  fe  vend  |  A 
Londres,  chez  David  Mortier,  Li-  |  braire  dans  le  Strand,  a  1'  Enfeigne 
d'  Erafme.  |  M.  DCCIV.  I 

Collation.  —  This  is  a  separate  issue  of  the  Suite  Du  Voyage  of  this 
year,  which  as  already  shown  in  loco  is  merely  the  sheets  of  the  1703 
original  with  a  new  title-page. 

Copies.  — BM,  C,  JCB,  NL  (two). 


Ixvi  Lahontan  Bibliography 

1705  —  French:  Jonas  VHonore  —  Vol.  i. 

Voyages  |  du   Baron  |  de  La   Hontan  |  dans  |  I'Amerique  |  Sep- 

tentrionale,  |  Qui  contiennent  une  Relation  des  differens  Peuples  |  qui 

y  habitent ;  la  nature  de  leur  Gouvernement ;   leur  |  Commerce,  leur 

Coutumes,  leur  Religion,  &  |  leur  maniere  de  faire  la  Guerre :  |  L'ln- 

teret  des  Franfois  &  des  Anglois  dans  le  Com-  |  merce  qu'ils  font  avec 

ces  Nations  ;  I'avantage  que  |  I'Angleterre  peut  retirer  de  ce  Pais,  etant 

I  en  Guerre  avec  la  France.  |  Le  tout  enrichi  de  Cartes  &  de  Figures. 

I  Tome  Premier.  |  Seconde  Edition,  revue,  corrigee,  &  augmentee.  | 

{.Cut,  with  emblematic  scene,  globe,  pillar  and  figures\  \ 

A  La  Haye,  |  Chez  Jonas  I'Honore,  &  Compagnie.  |  mdccv.  | 
Collation.  —  i2mo  ;  engraved  frontispiece,  w^ith  title:  "  Nouveaux 
I  Voyages  |  du  Barron  1  de  Lahontan  ";  title,  verso  blank;  "Preface," 
pp.  (8);  "Table  des  Lettres  du  Tome  Premier,"  pp.  (8);  "Voyages" 
or  text,  pp.  [i]-364;  "  Explication  de  quelques  Termes,"  pp.  365-376. 
No  mispaging.  The  ist,  3d,  5th,  6th,  nth  to  14th,  and  i6th  lines  and 
place  and  date  of  imprint  printed  in  red.  In  some  copies,  if  not  indeed 
in  all,  the  paper  of  signatures  N — P  (pp.  289-360)  is  browned. 

Pto«.  —  Opposite  pp.  I,  38,  53,  82,  91,  118,  127,  174,  244,  303, 
324,  and  340;  a  folded  "Carte  que  les  Gnacsitares  ont  dessine,"  etc., 
opp.  p.  I.     The  only  characteristic  variation  between  the  Jonas  and 
Franfois  I'Honore  issues  of  this  year  seems  to  be  their  title-pages. 
Signatures.  —  *  in  nine,  A — P  in  twelves,  Q  in  eight. 
Copies.— "QM,  JCB,  NL,  NYHS  (imperfect). 

1 705  —  French  :   Jonas  VHonore  —  VoL.  2. 

Memoires  |  de  |  I'Amerique  |   Septentrionale,  |   ou  la  Suite  |   des 

Voyages  de  Mr.  le  |  Baron  de  La  Hontan:  |  Qui  contiennent  la  De- 

fcription  d'une  grande  etendue  |  de  Pais  de  ce  Continent,  I'interet  des 

Franfois  &  des  |  Anglois,  leurs  Commerces,  leurs  Navigations,  |  les 


Lahontan  Bibliography  Ixvii 

Moeurs  &  les  Coutumes  des  Sauvages,  &c.  |  Avec  un  petit  Dictionaire 
de  la  Langue  du  Pais.  |  Le  tout  enrichi  de  Cartes  &  de  Figures.  | 
Tome  Second.  |  Seconde  Edition,  augmentee  des  Conversations  de  | 
I'Auteur  avec  un  Sauvage  diftingue.  |   \_Same  cut  as  in  first  volume]  \ 

A  Amsterdam,  |  Pour  Jonas  THonore  a  la  Haye.  |  M  DCC  v.  | 

Collation.  —  i2mo;  title,  verso  blank;  "Memoires,"  pp.  5-196; 
"  Conversations  de  I'Auteur  de  ces  Voyages  avec  Adario,"pp.  197-310; 
half-title:  "Dictionaire  |  de  la  Langue  |  des  Sauvages,"  on  p.  [311]; 
p.  [312]  blank;  "Dictionaire,"  pp.  313-336;  "Table  Des  Matieres 
principales  contenues  dans  ce  II  Volume,"  pp.  (2).  No  mispaging. 
The  1st,  3d,  6th,  7th,  12th,  and  14th  lines  and  place  and  date  of  im- 
print printed  in  red. 

Plates.— Opposite  pp.  95,  104,  125,  129,  133,  148,  155,  160,  185, 
187,  189,  and  191;  frontispiece  "Carte  Generale  de  Canada  a  petit 
point,"  and  a  large  folded  "  Carte  Generale  de  Canada  "  opp.  p.  5. 

Signatures. — Title-page,  A3 — [A12] ,  B — O  in  twelves,  P  in  one. 

Co^-«.— BM,  JCB.NL. 

1705  —  French:  Francois  V Honor'e  —  VOL.  I. 

Voyages  |  du  Baron  |  de  La  Hontan  |  dans  |  I'Amerique  |  Sep- 
tentrionale,  |  Qui  contiennent  une  Relation  des  difierens  Peuples  | 
qui  y  habitent;  la  nature  de  leur  Gouvernement;  leur  |  Commerce, 
leurs  Coutumes,  leur  Religion,  &  |  leur  maniere  de  faire  la  Guerre:  | 
L'Interet  des  Francois  &  des  Anglois  dans  le  Com-  |  merce  qu'ils  font 
avec  ces  Nations;  I'avantage  que  |  I'Angleterre  peut  retirer  de  ce  Pais, 
etant  |  en  Guerre  avec  la  France.  |  Le  tout  enrichi  de  Cartes  &  de 
Figures.  |  Tome  Premier.  |  Seconde  Edition,  revue,  corrigee,  &  aug- 
mentee. I    \_Emblematic  cut,  a  globe  with  five  figures  seated  near  a  colutnni  \ 

A  Amsterdam,  |  Chez  Franfois  I'Honore  vis-a-vis  de  la  Bourfe.  | 
M  D  CC  V.  I 


Ixviii  Lahontan  Bibliography 

Collation.  —  i2mo;  engraved  frontispiece,  with  title:  "Nouveaux  I 
Voyages  |  du  Barron  |  de  Lahontan";  title,  verso  blank;  "Preface," 
pp.  (8);  "Table  des  Lettres  du  Tome  Premier,"  pp.  (8);  "Voyages" 
or  text,  pp.  [i] — 364;  "Explication  de  quelques  Termes,"  pp.  365- 
376.  No  mispaging.  The  ist,  3d,  5th,  6th,  nth  to  14th,  and  i6th 
lines  and  place  and  date  of  imprint  printed  in  red. 

Plates. — Opposite  pp.  i,  38,  53,  82  (corrected  from  72),  91,  118, 
127,  174,  244,  303,  324,  and  340;  a  folded  "  Carte  que  les  Gnacsitares 
ont  dessine,"  etc.,  opp.  p.  i ,  but  often  found  at  some  other  location  in  the 
volume.  The  only  characteristic  variation  between  the  Franfois  and 
Jonas  I'Honore  issues  of  this  year  seems  to  be  their  title-pages. 

Signatures.  — *  in  nine,  A — P  in  twelves,  Q  in  eight. 

Copies.  — B,  BM,  C,  HC. 

1705  —  French  :  Francois  VHonor'e  —  VOL.  2. 
Memoires  |  de  |  I'Amerique  1  Septentrionale,  |  ou    la    suite  |  des 
Voyages  de  Mr.  le  Baron  de  La  Hontan  :  |  Qui  contiennent  la  De- 
fcription  d'une  grande  etendue  |  de  Pais  de  ce  Continent,  I'interet  des 
Francois  &  des  |  Anglois,  leurs  Commerces,   leurs  Navigations,  I  les 
Moeurs  &  les  Coutumes  des  Sauvages,  &c.  |  Avec  un  petit  Dictionaire 
de  la  Langue  du  Pais.  |  Le  tout  enrichi  de  Cartes  &  de  Figures.  | 
Tome  Second.  |  Seconde  Edition,  augmentee  des  Conversations  de  | 
I'Auteur  avec  un  Sauvage  diftingue.  |   [_Same  cut  as  in  first  volume'}  | 
A  Amsterdam,  |  Chez  Franfois  I'Honore  &Compagnie.|  M  DCC  v.  | 
Collation.  —  i2mo;   title,   verso   blank;    "Memoires,"  pp.  5-196; 
"  Conversations,"  pp.  197-310;  half-title:  Dictionare  |  de  la  Langue  | 
des  Sauvages,"  on  p.  [311];  p.  [312]  blank;  "Dictionaire,"  pp.  313- 
336;  "Table  Des  Matieres  principales  contenues  dans  ce  II  Volume," 
pp.  (2).     No  mispaging.     The  ist,  3d,  6th,  7th,  12th,  and  14th  lines 
and  place  and  date  of  imprint  printed  in  red. 


Lahontan  Bibliography  Ixix 

/'/<7/fj.  —  Opposite  pp.  95,  104,  125,  129,  133,  148,  155,  160,  185, 
187,  189,  and  191;  frontispiece  "Carte  Generale  de  Canada  a  petit 
point,"  and  large  folded  "Carte  generale  du  Canada  "  opp.  p.  5,  but 
having  the  location  mark  "  Pag:  i  "  engraved  upon  it. 

Signatures.  —  A — O  in  twelves,  P  in  one. 

Copies.  — B,  BM,  C,  HC  (lacks  large  map). 

1705  —  English:  Extract. 

A  Voyage  to  North  America.  Or  a  Geographical  Defcription  of 
Canada.  By  the  Baron  La  Hontan,  Lord  Lieutenant  of  the  French 
Colony  at  Placentia  in  Newfound-Land. 

The  above  title  is  the  heading  of  chap,  xvi  of  the  original  folio 
edition  of  John  Harris's  Navigantium  atqiie  Itinerantium  Bibliotheca  : 
Or,  a  Complcat  Collection  of  Voyages  and  Travels :  .  .  .  Volume  II. 
(London:  Printed  for  Thomas  Bennet  .  .  .  mdccv).  The  com- 
plete extract  from  Lahontan  is  embraced  by  Harris's  chapters  xvi-xxvi, 
or  pp.  915-928. 

The  revised  editions  of  Harris  (edited  by  J.  Campbell),  published 
in  1 744-1 748  and  1764,  do  not  contain  these  excerpts. 

1706  —  French  — Vol.  i. 

Voyages  f  cfu  Baron  |  de  La  Hontan  |  dans  |  I'Amerique  |  Sep- 
tentrionale,  |  Qui  contiennent  une  Relation  des  differens  Peuples  | 
qui  y  habitent ;  la  nature  de  leur  Gouvernement  ;  leur  |  Commerce, 
leurs  Coutumes,  leur  Religion ;  &  |  leur  maniere  de  faire  la  Guerre :  | 
L'Interet  des  Francois  &  des  Anglois  dans  le  Com-  |  merce  qu'ils  font 
avec  ces  Nations  ;  I'avantage  que  |  I'Angleterre  peut  retirer  de  ce  Pais, 
etant  |  en  Guerre  avec  la  France.  |  Le  tout  enrichi  de  Cartes  &  de 
Figures.  |  Tome  Premier.  |  Seconde  Edition,  revue,  corrige,  &  aug- 
mentee.  |   \_Cut  of  three  cherubs'\  \ 


Ixx  Lahontan  Bibliography 

A  La  Haye,  |  Chez  Charles  Delo,  fur  le  Singel.  |  MDCCVI.  | 
This  edition  is  merely  a  reissue  from  the  same  sheets  of  the  two 
1705  issues  of  Franfois  and  Jonas  I'Honore,  with  which  it  agrees  in 
collation ;  even  the  paper  of  signatures  N — P  is  browned  as  in  them, 
and  all  typographical  peculiarities  are  repeated  in  the  body  of  both 
volumes. 

Copies.  —  BA  (lacks  many  plates  and  the  large  map),  JCB,  NL. 

1 706  —  French  —  Vol.  2. 

Memoires  |  de  |  I'Amerique  |  Septentrionale,  |  ou  la  Suite  |  des 
Voyages  de  Mr.  le  |  Baron  de  La  Hontan :  |  Qui  contiennent  la  De- 
fcription  d'une  grande  etendue  |  de  Pais  de  ce  continent,  I'interet  des 
Franfois  &  des  |  Anglois,  leurs  Commerces,  leurs  Navigations,  |  les 
Moeurs  &  les  Coutumes  des  Sauvages,  &c.  |  Avec  un  petit  Dictionaire 
de  la  Langue  du  Pais.  |  Tome  Second.  |  Seconde  Edition,  augmente 
des  Conversations  |  de  I'Auteur  avec  un  Sauvage  diftingue.  |  [C«/  of 
two  cherubs  bearing  the  host^  \ 

A  La  Haye,  |  Chez  Charles  Delo,  fur  le  Singel.  |  MDCCVi.  | 

This  edition  is  merely  a  reissue  from  the  same  sheets  of  the  two 
1705  issues  of  Franfois  and  Jonas  I'Honore,  with  which  it  agrees  in 
collation. 

Copies.  —  BA  (lacks  many  plates  and  the  large  map),  JCB,  NL. 

1707  —  French  —  Vol.  i. 

Nouveaux  |  Voyages  |  de  Monsieur  |  le  Baron  de  Lahontan,  I 
dans  1  I'Amerique  |  Septentrionale,  |  Qui  contiennent  une  Relation 
des  difife-  |  rens  Peuples  qui  y  habitent,  la  nature  1  de  leur  Gouverne- 
ment,  leur  Commerce,  |  leurs  Coiatumes,  leur  Religion,  &  leur  |  ma- 
niere  de  faire  la  Guerre.  |  L'interet  des  Francois  &  des  Anglois  dans  le 
I  Commerce  qu'ils  font  avec  ces  Nations;  |  I'avantage  que  la  France, 


Lahontan  Bibliography  Ixxi 

peut  retirer  dans  ce  |  Pais,  etant  en  Guerre  avec  I'Angleterre.  |  Le 
tout  enrichi  de  Cartes  &  de  Figures.  |  Tome  Premier.  |   \Floral  cui\   \ 

A  La  Haye,  |  Chez  Isaac  Delorme,  Libraire.  |  m.  dccvii.  | 

Collation. —  i2mo  ;  title,  verso  blank  ;  "  A  sa  Majeste  Frederic  IV," 
pp.  (4);  "  Preface,"  pp.  (6);  "Table  des  Lettres  du  tome  I,"  pp.  (6); 
"Voyages,"  pp.  1-342;  "Explication  de  quelques  Termes  qui  se 
trouvent  dans  le  premier  Tome,"  pp.  343~354 ;  "Table  des  Matieres 
contenues  dans  le  premier  Tome,"  pp.  (12).  Pp.  22,  190,  191,  193, 
218,  282,  and  283  are  mispaged  72,  192,  193,  195,  198,  284,  and  285, 
respectively.     Title-page  printed  wholly  in  black. 

Plates.  —  The  copy  in  the  Library  of  Congress,  the  only  one  I  have 
been  able  to  examine,  evidently  lacks  six  plates  and  two  maps.  It  has 
a  frontispiece  of  an  Indian  in  an  oval,  and  plates  opposite  pp.  47,  loi, 
119,  161,  and  313.  Two  leaves  from  sig.  E  (pp.  107-110)  are  also 
wanting  in  that  copy. 

Signatures.  —  Title,  a  in  eight,  A — B  in  sixes,  b  in  twelve,  C — P  in 
twelves,  Q  in  four  (last  leaf  blank).  Fs  printed  Fv ;  I4  printed  liiij ; 
I5  printed  Iv. 

Copies.  —  C  (imperfect). 

1 708  —  French  —  Vol.  2. 

Memoires  |  de  |  I'Amerique  |  Septentrionale,  I  ou  la  Suite  des 
Voyages  I  de  Monsieur  |  le  Baron  de  Lahontan,  |  qui  contiennent  | 
La  Defcription  d'une  grande  etendue  de  |  Pais  de  ce  Continent, 
I'interet  des  |  Franfois  &  des  Anglois,  leurs  Com-  |  merces,  leurs  Nav- 
igations, les  Moeurs  |  &  les  Coutumes  des  Sauvages  &c.  |  Avec  un 
Dictionnaire  de  la  Langue  du  Pais.  |  Le  tout  enrichi  de  Cartes  &  de 
Figures.  |  Tome  Seconde.  |   \_Cut,  a  pot  of  flowers^  \ 

A  La  Haye,  |  Chez  Isaac  Delorme,  Libraire.  |  M.  DCCViii.  | 
Collation.  —  i2mo;   title,  verso  blank;   "Memoires,"   pp.   1-215  ; 


Ixxii  Lahontan  Bibliography 

p.  [216]  blank;  "Petit  Dictionaire  de  la  Langue  des  Sauvages," 
pp.  217-239;  verso  of  p.  239  blank.  Pp.  38,  39,  40,  44,  105,  116, 
150,  and  160  are  mispaged  36,  37,  38,  48,  89,  115,  250,  and  60,  respec- 
tively.    The  title-page  printed  wholly  in  black. 

Plates.  —  The  copy  in  the  Library  of  Congress,  the  only  one  I  have 
been  able  to  examine,  evidently  lacks  five  plates  and  perhaps  a  small 
map  of  Canada.  It  has  plates  opposite  pp.  97,  104,  132,  136,  155, 
166,  and  211  ;  and  a  "Carte  generale  de  Canada"  opp.  p.  3. 

Signatures.  — Title,  A — K  in  twelves.  Sig.  A3  is  printed  Aiij ;  C5 
printed  Cv  ;  E5  printed  Ev  ;  K2  printed  Kij. 

Copies.  —  C  (imperfect). 

1708  —  French  —  Vol.  3. 

Dialogues  |  de  Monsieur  |  le  Baron  de  Lahontan,  |  et  d'un  | 
Sauvage,  |  dans  I'Amerique.  I  Contenant  |  Une  defcription  exacte  des 
mceurs  |  &  des  coutumes  de  ces  Peuples  |  Sauvages.  |  Avec  les  Voy- 
ages du  meme  en  Portugal  |  &  en  Danemarc,  dans  lefquels  on  |  trouve 
des  particularitez  tres-curieufes,  |  &  qu'on  n'a  point  encore  remarquees. 
I  Le  tout  enrichi  de  Cartes  &  de  Figures.  |  Tome  Troisieme.  |  \_Same 
floral  cut  as  in  vol.  j]  | 

A  La  Haye,  |  Chez  Isaac  Delorme,  Libraire.  |  M.  Dccviii.  | 

Collation.  —  i2mo;  title,  verso  blank;  "Preface,"  pp.  (13);  "Avis 
de  I'Auteur  au  Lecteur,"pp.  (3);  "Dialogues,"  pp.  1-174;  one  blank 
leaf  for  pp.  [175]  and  [176];  half-title:  "Voyages  |  de  |  Portugal  | 
et  de  I  Danemarc,"  on  p.  [177;  p.  [178]  blank;  "  Voyages,"  pp.  179- 
374.  Pp.  265,  268,  269,  272,  273,  276,  277,  280,  281,  284,  285,  and 
288  are  mispaged  269,  272,  273,  276,  277,  280,  281,  284,  285,  288,  289, 
and  290,  respectively.     Title-page  printed  wholly  in  black. 

Plates.  —  The  copy  in  the  Library  of  Congress,  the  only  one  I  have 


Lahontan  Bibliography  Ixxiii 

been  able  to  examine,  evidently  lacks  three  plates  and  two  maps,  of 
Portugal  and  Denmark.     It  has  one  plate  opposite  p.  i. 

Signatures.  —  a  in  five,  b  in  four,  A — P  in  twelves,  Q  in  eight  (last 
leaf  blank).     Sig.  H4  is  a  blank  leaf. 

Copies.  —  C  (imperfect) . 

1709  — French  —  Vol.  i. 

Nouveaux  |  Voyages  |  de  Mr  le  Baron  |  de  Lahontan,  |  dans  | 
TAmerique  |  Septentrionale.  1  Qui  contiennent  une  relation  des  dif- 
ferens  Peu-  |  pies  qui  y  habitent,  la  nature  de  leur  Gouver-  |  nement, 
leur  Commerce,  leur  Coiatume,  leur  |  Religion,  &leurmaniere  de  faire 
la  Guerre.  |  L'intetet  des  Francois  &  des  Anglois  dans  le  |  Commerce 
qu'ils  font  avec  ces  Nations,  I'a-  |  vantage  que  I'Angleterre  peut  retirer 
dans  I  ce  Pais,  etant  en  Guerre  avec  la  France.  |  Le  tout  enrichi  de 
Cartes  &  de  Figures.  |  Tome  Premier.  |   \_Small  ornament]  \ 

A  La  Haye,  |  Chez  les  Freres  L  Honore,  Marchands  |  Libraires.  | 
M.  DCCIX. 

Collation.  —  i2mo  ;  title,  verso  blank  ;  "A  sa  Majeste  Frederic  IV," 
pp.  (3);  "  Preface,"  pp.  (5);  "  Table  des  Lettres  du  I.  tome,"  pp.  (8); 
"Voyages,"  pp.  1-266;  "Explication  de  quelques  Termes,"  pp.  267- 
280.  Pp.  229  and  274  are  misprinted  129  and  174,  respectively. 
Title-page  printed  entirely  in  black. 

Plates.  —  Frontispiece  of  an  Indian  and  opposite  pp.  14,  34,  47,  72, 
85,98,  116,  141,  174,  225,  and  242  ;  small  "Carte  generale  du  Canada 
en  petit  point  "  opp.  p.  i,  and  a  small  folded  "  Carte  que  les  Gnacsitares 
ont  Dessine  "  opp.  p.  136. 

Signatures.  —  A — M  in  twelves,  N  in  six  (the  last  leaf  blank). 

Copies.— HC  (two),  JCB. 


Ixxiv  Lahontan  Bibliography 

1709  — French  — Vol.  2. 

Memoires  |  de  |  I'Amerique  |  Septentrionale,  |  ou  |  la  Suite  des 
Voyages  |  de  |  Mr  le  Baron  de  Lahontan.  I  Qui  contiennent  la  De- 
fcription  d'une  |  grande  etendue  de  pais  de  ce  Con-  |  tinent,  I'interet 
des  Francois  &  des  |  Anglois,  leurs  Commerces,  leurs  |  Navigations,  les 
Moeurs  &  les  Cou  |  tumes  des  Sauvages,  &c.  |  Avec  un  petit  Diction- 
naire  de  la  Langue  du  Pais.  1  Le  tout  enrichi  de  Cartes  &  de  Figures. 
I  Et  augmente  dans  ce  fecond  Tome  de  la  ma-  |  niere  dont  les  Sauvages 
fe  regalent.  |   \_Same  small  ornament  as  in  vol.  j]  I 

A  La  Haye,  |  Chez  les  freres  L  Honore,  Marchands  Libraires.  | 
M.  DCCIX.  I 

Collation.  — i2mo;  title,  verso  blank;  "Memoires,"  pp.  3-198; 
"  Petit  Dictionaire  de  la  Langue  des  Sauvages,"  pp.  199-222;  "Table 
des  Matieres  contenues  dans  les  deux  Tomes,"  pp.  (18).  Pp.  200  and 
220  are  mispaged  220  and  120,  respectively.  Title-page  printed  entirely 
in  black. 

P/fl^w.  —  Opposite  pp.  95,  lOi,  125,  130,  151,  155.  167,  185,  189, 
190,  and  191  ;  a  folded  "Carte  generale  de  Canada"  opp.  p.  5. 

Signatures.  —  A — K  in  twelves.     Big.  K4  is  misprinted  K3. 

Copies.  — nC  (two),  JCB. 

1 709  —  German  :  Abridgment. 

Des  beriihmten  |  Herrn  |  Baron  De  Lahontan  |  Neueste  Reisen 

I  Nach  I  Nord-Indien/  |  Oder  dem  |  Mitternachtischen  America,  | 

Mit   vielen   besondern    und   bey   keinem    Scribenten  1  befindlichen  | 

Curiositaeten.  |  Aus  dem  Frantzosischen  iibersetzet  |  Von  |  M.  Vis- 

cher.  I 

Hamburg  und  Leipzig/  |  Im  Reumannischen  Verlag/MDCCIX.  | 
Collation.  —  i2mo;   doublepage  title,  with  reverse  blank;   "Gen- 


Lahontan  Bibliography  Ixxv 

eigter  Leser!",  signed  by  the  translator  and  dated  at  "  Hamburg  d.  15. 
April:  1709,"  pp.  (8);  text  with  heading:  "  Des  Herrn  Baron  de  la 
Hontan  Nord-Indien,"  pp.  1-252;  half-title  of  second  part:  "  Der  | 
Historischen  |  Nachrichten  |  Des  |  Herrn  Baron  de  la  |  Hontan,  | 
Von  I  Nord-Indien/  |  Zweyter  Theil,"  on  p.  253  ;  text  of  same,  pp. 
254-432;  "  Anhang  eines  Worter-Buchs  von  der  Wilden  Sprache," 
pp.  433-454;  "Register,"  pp.  455-459;  verso  of  p.  459  blank.  Pp. 
127,  373,  376,  377,  and  380  are  mispaged  107,  343,  347,  358,  and  339, 
respectively.     Title-page  printed  wholly  in  black. 

Plates.  —  No  plates,  but  small  folded  "  General  Carte  von  Canada  " 
before  the  title-page. 

Signatures.  — )( in  six  (of  which  the  folded  title-page  is  a  part) ,  a— t 
in  twelves,  u  in  two.  The  signature  mark  of  be  is  on  the  verso  of  that 
leaf,  and  that  of  d4  is  wanting. 

Copies.  — "RM,  C,  JCB. 

1 7 10  —  Dutch:  Extract. 

Van  den  oorspronk  en  de  kracht  der  Vooroordeelen,  Door  J.  T. 
Als  mede  een  koort  Uyttreksel  Uyt  de  Aanteykeninge  van  de  Baron 
de  Lahontan,  rakende  de  Zeden,  't  Geloof,  en't  verstant  van  de  Wilden 
tot  Canada,  en  de  lof  der  hedendaagse  Eeuw,  in  vergelykinge,  van 
de  voorgaande  Eeuwen.  En  dat  er  zoo  veele  Atheisten  niet  zyn  als 
men  doorgaans  gelooft,  Door  J.  de  Klerk.  Amsterdam  :  Jan  Blum. 
1710.     i2mo. 

This  title  is  copied  from  Joseph  Sabin's  Dictionary'  of  Books  Re- 
lating to  America,  item  38048.  A  distorted  title  of  the  same  is  given  in 
Frederik  MuUer's  Catalogue  of  Books,  Maps,  Plates  on  America.  Part  I. 
(Amsterdam,  1872),  item  317.  I  have  not  seen  this  extract.  See 
another  edition,  under  1723. 


Ixxvi  Lahontan  Bibliography 

171 1  —German. 

Des  beruhmten  |  Herrn  |  Baron  De  Lahontan  |  Neueste  Reisen  | 
Nach  I  Nord-Indien/  |  Oder     dem  |  Mitternachtischen     America  ', 
Mit  vielen  besondern  und  bey  keinem  Scribenten  befindlichen  1  Curio- 
sitzeten.  |  Auch   bey  dieser  andern  Auflage   mit  |  Seiner  Reise   nach 
Portugall/Dennemarck  und  |  Spanien/vermehret.  |  Aus  dem  Frant- 
zosischen  vibersetzet  |  Von  M.  Vischer.  | 

Hamburg  und  Leipzig/  I  Im  Reumannischen  Verlag/MDCCXI.  | 

Collation.  —  i2mo  ;  doublepage  title,  with  reverse  blank  ;  "  Vorrede. 
An  den  verstandigen  Leser,"  dated  at  end  "  Hamburg,  d.  20.  Novemb. 
1710,"  pp.  (19);  one  blank  page;  text  headed:  "Des  Herrn  Baron  de 
la  Hontan  Nord-Indien,"  pp.  1-316;  half-title:  "  Der  1  Historischen 
I  Nachrichten  |  Des  |  Herrn  Baron  de  la  I  Hontan,  |  Von  1  Nord- 
Indien/  I  Zweyter  Theil,"  on  p.  [317];  text  of  same,  pp.  318-563; 
"  Anhang  eines  Worter-Buchs  von  der  Wilden  Sprache,"  pp.  563-590; 
"  Des  Beriihmten  Herrn  Baron  de  la  Hontan  Reise  nach  Portugall  und 
Dennemarck,"  pp.  591-747  ;  "  Register,"  pp.  748-753 ;  verso  of  p.  753 
blank.  Pp.  51,  212,  and  359  are  mispaged  24,  112,  and  395,  respect- 
ively; there  is  also  an  elision  of  pp.  254  and  255.  Title-page  wholly 
in  black. 

Plates.  —  No  plates,  but  a  "  General-Carte  von  Canada,"  folded,  to 

precede  p.  i. 

Signatures.  — )(  in  twelve  (of  which  the  folded  title-page  forms  a 
part).  A— Hh  in  twelves,  li  in  four.  Signature  mark  R4  is  wanting. 
The  translator  calls  this  the  "  Zweite  Auflage  "  in  German. 

Copies.— ]CB. 

1715  — French  — Vol.  i. 

Nouveaux  |  Voyages  I  de  M""-  le  Baron  1  de  Lahontan,  |  dans  | 
I'Amerique  |  Septentrionale.  I  Qui  contient  une  relation  des  differens 
Peuples  1  qui  y  habitent,  la  nature  de  leur  Gouverne-  I  ment,  leur 


Lahontan  Bibliography  Ixxvii 

Commerce,  leur  Coutume,  leur  |  Religion,  &  leur  maniere  de  faire  la 
Guerre.  |  L'interet  des  Frangois  &  des  Anglois  dans  le  Com-  |  merce 
qu'ils  font  avec  ces  Nations,  I'avantage  |  que  I'Angleterre  peut  retirer 
dans  ce  Pais,  |  etant  en  Guerre  avee  la  France.  |  Le  tout  enrich!  de 
Cartes  &  de  Figures.  |   Tome  Premier.  |   [Small  ornament^  \ 

A  La  Haye,  |  Chez  les  Freres  L  Honore,  Marchands  Libraires.  | 
M.  DCCXV.  I 

Collation.  —  i2mo  ;  title,  verso  blank  ;  "  A  sa  Majeste  Frederic  IV,". 
pp.  (3);  "  Preface,"  pp.  (5);  "  Table  des  Lettres  du  L  tome,"  pp.  (8); 
"Voyages"  or  text,  pp.  1-266;  "Explication  de  quelques  Termes," 
pp.  267-280.  Pp.  130,  141,  and  274  are  misprinted  180,  411,  and  174, 
respectively,  and  the  paging  of  131  is  broken.  Title-page  printed  en- 
tirely in  black. 

Plates. —  Frontispiece  and  opposite  pp.  14,  34,  47,  72,  85,  98,  116, 
141,  155,  174,  225,  and  242;  a  small  "Carte  generate  du  Canada 
en  petit  point  "  opp.  p.  9,  and  a  folded  "  Carte  que  les  Gnacsitares  ont 
Dessine,  etc.,  opp.  p.  136. 

Signatures.  —  A — M  in  twelves,  N  in  six  (the  last  leaf  blank).  Sig. 
Me  is  misprinted  He. 

C0/./VJ.  — BN,  HC,  LU. 

1715  —  French  — Vol.  2. 
Memoires  |  de  |  I'Amerique  |  Septentrionale,  |  ou  |  la  Suite  des 
Voyages  |  de  |  Mr  le  Baron  de  Lahontan.  |  Qui  contient  la  Defcrip- 
tion  d'une  gran-  |  de  etendue  de  Pais  de  ce  Continent,  |  l'interet  des 
Franfois  &  des  Anglois,  |  leurs  Commerces,  leurs  Navigations,  |  leur 
Moeurs  &  les  Coiatumes  des  Sau-  |  vages,  <Scc.  |  Avec  un  petit  Diction- 
naire  de  la  Langue  du  Pais.  I  Le  tout  enrichi  de  Cartes  Sc  de  Figures. 
I  Et  augmente  dans  fe  Second  Tome  de  la  maniere  |  dont  les  Sauvages 
fe  regalent.  |   [Same  ornament  as  vol.  j]  | 


Ixxviii  Lahontan  Bibliography 

A  La  Haye,  |  Chez  les  Freres  L  Honore,  Marchands  Libraires.  | 
M.  DCCXV.  I 

Collation.  —  i2mo;  title,  verso  blank;  "  Memoires,"  pp.  i  \_t.e.  3]  — 
198;  "Petit  Dictionnaire  de  la  Langue  des  Sauvages,"  pp.  199-222; 
"Table  des  Matieres,"  pp.  (18).  Pp.  3,  lOO,  200,  and  220  are  mis- 
printed 1,1,  220,  and  122,  respectively. 

Plates.  —  Opposite  pp.  55,  95,  lOi,  125,  130,  151,  174,  189,  190, 
and  191 ;  a  large  folded  "  Carte  generate  de  Canada,"  v^^ithout  page 
location,  but  opposite  the  title-page  in  Harvard  copy. 

Signatures.  —  A — K  in  twelves.  Sig.  F3  and  K4  misprinted  Fs  and 
C3,  respectively. 

CoM.  — BN,  HC,  LU. 

1723  — Dutch:  Extract. 

Den  Oorfpronk  en  de  kracht  |  der  |  Vooroordeelen ;  |  klaar  ver- 
toont  in  een  brief  door  J.  T.  |  Als  mede  |  In  de  zeden,  't  geloof,  en  't 
verftant  |  der  Wilden  te  |  Kanada,  |  getrokken  uit  de  Aantekeningen 
van  I  den  Baron  de  |  La  Hontan.  |  Waar  by  gevoegt  is  |  Den  lof  der 
hedensdaagfche  Eeuw,  in  |  vergelyking  met  de  voorgaande  Eeuwen.  | 
Door  I  J.  De  Klerk,  |   \_Floral  ornament^  \ 

Gedrukt  in  't  Jaar  1723.  | 

Collation.  —  Small  8vo ;  title,  verso  blank;  "Den  oorspronk  en  de 
kracht  der  Vooroordeelen,"  pp.  3-1 1  ;  "Een  kort  Uyttreksel  Uyt  de 
Memoires  de  I'Amerique  Septentrionale  van  Mr.  le  Baron  de  Lahontan, 
Tome  Second,"  pp.  12-26;  "Een  kort  Extract  Uyt  de  beschryvinge 
van  't  Eyland  Formosa,"  pp.  27-29 ;  "  Den  lof  der  hedendaagze  Eeuw," 
etc.,  pp.  29-39;  verso  of  p.  39  blank.  No  mispaging.  Title  wholly  in 
black. 

Signatures. —  A — B  in  eights,  C  in  four. 

Copies.  —  JCB. 


Laho7ita7i  Bibliography  Ixxlx 

1728  —  French  — Vol.  i. 

Voyages  |  du  Baron  |  de  Lahontan  |  dans  |  I'Amenque  |  Septen- 
trionale,  |  Qui  contiennent  une  Relation  des  differens  |   Peuples  qui  y 
habitent ;  la  nature  de  leur  |  Gouvernement ;  leur  Commerce,  leurs  | 
Coutumes,    leur    Religion,   &  leur   maniere  |  de    faire   la   Guerre :  | 
L'Interet  des  Francois  &  des  Anglois  dans  le  |  Commerce  qu'ils  font 
avec  ces  Nations ;  I'a-  |  vantage  que  I'Angleterre  peut  retirer  de  ce  | 
Pais,  etant  en  Guerre  avec  la  France.  |  Le  tout  enrichi  de  Cartes  & 
de  Figures.  |  Tome    Premier.  |  Seconde   Edition,   revue,   corrigee,   & 
augmentee.  |   \_Cut  with  two  flower  vases]  \ 

A  Amsterdam,  |  Chez  Francois  I'Honore,  vis-a-vis  de  la  Bourfe.  | 
M.  DCC.  XXVIII.  I 

Collation.  —  i2mo;  title,  verso  blank;  "Preface,"  pp.  (8);  "Table 
des  Lettres  du  tome  premier,"  pp.  (8);  "  Voiages  "  or  text,  pp.  1-398  ; 
"  Explication  de  quelques  Termes,"  pp.  399-408.  No  mispaging.  The 
1st,  3d,  5th,  6th,  I2th  to  15th,  and  17th  lines  and  place  and  date  of 
imprint  printed  in  red. 

Plates.  —  Frontispiece  and  opposite  pp.  17,  40,  56,  90,  91,  97,  129, 
136,  188,  216,  351,  and  358;  a  small  "  Carte  generale  du  Canada  en 
petit  point"  opp.  p.  105,  and  folded  "Carte  que  les  Gnacsitares  ont 
Dessine,"  etc.,  opp.  p.  162. 

Signatures.  —  Title-page,  *  in  eight,  A — R  in  twelves. 

Copies.  — "&  (two),  BA,  BM,  BN,  C,  HC  (lacks  a  map),  JCB, 
LLQ,  LP,  LU,  NL,  WHS. 

1728  — French  — Vol.  2. 

Memoires  |  de  |  I'Amerique  |  Septentrionale,  |  ou    la    Suite  |  des 

Voyages  de  Mr.  le  1  Baron  de  Lahontan :  |  Qui  contiennent  la  De- 

(cription  d'une  grande  etendue  |  de  Pais  de  ce  Continent,  I'interet  des 

Franfois  |  &  des  Anglois,  leurs  Commerces,  leurs  Naviga-  |  tions,  les 


Ixxx  Lahontan  Bibliography 

Moeurs  &  les  Coutumes  des  Sauvages,  |  &c.  |  Avec  un  petit  Diction- 
aire  de  la  Langue  du  Pais.  |  Le  tout  enrichi  de  Cartes  &  de  Figures.  | 
Tome  Second.  |  Second  Edition,  augmentee  de  la  maniere  dont  les  | 
Sauvages  fe  regalent.  |   \_Cut  luith  two  flower  vases]  \ 

A  Amsterdam,  |  Chez  Francois  I'Honore  &  Compagnie.  I  M.  DCC. 
XXVIII.  I 

Collation.  —  i2mo;  title,  verso  blank;  "  Memoires,"  pp.  1-219; 
"  Dictionaire  de  la  Langue  des  Sauvages,"  pp.  220-238.  Pp.  161  and 
185  are  misprinted  151  and  158,  respectively.  The  ist,  3d,  6th,  7th, 
13th,  and  15th  lines  and  place  and  date  of  imprint  printed  in  red. 

Plates.  —  Opposite  pp.  98,  109,  142,  158,  plate  of  "Lac  des  Outa- 
gamis "  variously  placed  (but  incorrectly  engraved  "Tom.  2  Pag.  358"), 
plate  of  sun-dance  variously  placed  (but  incorrectly  engraved  "  Tom.  2. 
Pag.  267"),  178,  189,  193,  and  209;  a  folded  "Carte  generale  de 
Canada  "  opp.  p.  5. 

Signatures.  —  Title-page,  A — L  in  tvv^elves  (last  three  leaves  blank), 
but  often  found  w^ithout  the  final  blank  leaves. 

Copies.  — B  (two),  BA,  BM,  BN,  C,  JCB,  LLQ,  LP,  LU,  NL 
(lacks  a  map),  WHS. 

1728 — French  —  Vol.  3. 

Suite  I  du  I  Voyage  |  de  I'Amerique  |  ou  Dialogues  |  de  Mon- 
sieur I  le  Baron  de  Lahontan  |  et  d'un  |  Sauvage,  |  de  I'Amerique.  | 
Contenant  une  defcription  exacte  des  moeurs  |  &  des  coutumes  de  ces 
Peuples  Sauvages.  |  Avec  les  Voiages  du  meme  en  Portugal  &  en  Dane- 
I  marc  dans  lelquels  on  trouve  des  particularitez  |  tres-curieufes,  & 
qu'on  n'avoit  point  encore  re-  |  marquees.  |  Le  tout  enrichi  de  Cartes 
&  de  Figures.  |   \_Small  ornament]  \ 

A  Amsterdam.  |  Chez  la  Veuve  de  Boeteman.  |  M.  DCC.  XXVIII.  | 
Collation. —  i2mo;  title,  verso  blank;  "Preface,"  pp.  (lo);  "Avis 


Lahontan  Bibliography  Ixxxi 

del'Auteur  au  Lecteur,"  pp.  (2);  "  Dialogues,"  pp.  15-128;  "  Voiages 
de  Portugal  et  de  Danemarc,"  pp.  129-257,  with  verso  of  p.  257  blank. 
Pp.  84,  206,  207,  and  209  are  misprinted  48,  106,  107,  and  109,  respec- 
tively. The  ist,  3d,  5th,  7th,  9th,  and  17th  lines  and  place  and  date  of 
imprint  printed  in  red ;  in  the  Harvard  and  Carter-Brown  copies  the 
nth  and  12th  lines  are  also  printed  in  red. 

Plates.  —  Opposite  pp.  15,  136,  176,  and  182;  maps  of  Portugal  and 
Denmark  at  pp.  129  and  171,  respectively.  All  the  plates  are  marked 
for  "Tom.  III." 

Signatures. —  A — L  in  twelves  (the  last  three  leaves  blank). 

Copies.  —  B  (two,  one  of  which  lacks  the  maps),  BA,  BM,  BN,  C, 
HC,  JCB,  LLQ,  LP,  LU,  NL,  WHS. 

?  1 73 1 —  French  — Vols,  i  and  2. 

Voyages  du  Baron  de  Lahontan. 

In  Charles  Leclerc's  Bibliotheca  Americana  (Paris:  Maisonneuve  & 
Cie,  1867),  p.  193,  item  825,  the  following  description  appears: 

825.  —  Le  meme  ouvrage.  Amsterdam,  Fr.  L'Honore,  1731,  2  vol. 
in  — 12,  mar.  chocolat,  d.  s.  t. 

Vol.  i.  4  fnc,  188  pp.,  2  fnc,  front,  grave,  8  pi.  et  cartes. — Vol.  ii. 
2  fnc,  220  pp.,  6  pi.  et  cartes. 

I  believe  no  such  edition  exists,  and  that  the  date  was  mistaken  for 
M.  DCC.  XXXXi,  for  the  collation  agrees  with  vol.  i  and  vol.  ii  (called 
Suite)  of  the  1741  edition.  This  vagary  has  misled  every  bibliographer 
who  has  had  recourse  to  Leclerc's  title. 

? 1 73 1— French  —  Vols,  i  and  2. 

Nouveaux  Voyages  *  *  *  dans  I'Amerique  Septentrionale  *  *  *  . 

La  Haye,  Chez  les  Freres  I'Honore.    MDCCXXXI.    2  vols.,   i2mo,  pp. 

(8),  188,  (4);  (4),  220.     14  Plates  and  Maps, 
f 


Ixxxii  Lahontan  Bibliography 

This  title  appears  in  Joseph  Sabin's  Dictionary  of  Books  relating  to 
America,  no.  38640.  It  is  merely  a  repetition  of  Leclerc's  erroneous 
title  {q.  V.  preceding  title),  in  which  Sabin  has  rearranged  the  material 
of  Leclerc  and  mistaken  the  "  Fr."  as  "  Freres,"  instead  of  "  Franfois," 
and  changed  the  place  of  imprint  to  the  common  "  La  Haye  "  of  the 
earlier  editions  by  "  les  Freres  I'Honore."  I  believe  that  no  such 
edition  exists.  This  vagary  has  misled  every  bibliographer  u^ho  has  had 
recourse  to  Sabin  for  this  subject. 

1735  — English:  J.  and  J.  Bonwicke,  etc. —Vol.  i. 

New  I  Voyages   |  to    |  North  -  America.  |   Containing  |  An    Ac- 
count of  the  feveral  Nations  of  that  vaft  Con-  1  tinent ;  their  Cuftoms, 
Commerce,  and  Way  of  Naviga-  |  tion  upon  the  Lakes  and  Rivers ;  the 
feveral  Attempts  of  |  the  Englifh  and  French  to  difpoffefs  one  another  ; 
with  the  I  Reafons  of  the  Mifcarriage  of  the  former ;  and  the  various  | 
Adventures  between  the  French,  and  the  Iroquefe  Confe-  |  derates  of 
England,  from  1683  to  1694.  I  -A-  Geographical  Defcription  of  Canada, 
and  a  |  Natural  Hiflory  of  the  Country,  with  Remarks  upon  their  | 
Government,  and  the  Interefl  of  the  Englifh   and  French  |  in   their 
Commerce.  |  Alfo  a  Dialogue  between  the  Author  and  a  General  of 
the  I  Savages,  giving  a  full  View  of  the  Religion  and  ftrange  Opi-  ! 
nions  of  thofe  People :  With  an  Account  of  the  Author's  Retreat  |  to 
Portugal  and  Denmark,  and  his  Remarks  on  thofe  Courts.  |  To  which 
is   added,  |  A  Dictionary   of   the  Algonkine    Language,   which    is  | 
generally  fpoke   in    North-America.  |  Illuftrated    with   Twenty-Three 
Maps  and  Cuts.  |  Written  in  French  |  By  the  Baron  Lahontan,  | 
Lord  Lieutenant  of  the  French  Colony  at  Placentia  |  in  Newfoundland, 
at  that  Time  in  England.  |  Done  into  Englifh.     The  Second  Edition. 
I  In  Two  Volumes.  |   A  great   Part  of  which  never  Printed  in  the 
Original.  |  Vol.  I.  | 


Lahontan  Bibliography  Ixxxiii 

London:  |  Printed  for  J.  and  J.  Bonwicke,  R.  Wilkin,  S.  Birt,  T. 
Ward,  I  E.  Wicksteed ;  and  J.  Osborn.     M,  DCC,  xxxv.  | 

Collation.  —  8vo  ;  title,  verso  blank  ;  "  To  His  Grace  William  Duke 
of  Devonshire,"  pp.  (2);  "The  Preface,"  pp.  (8);  "The  Contents," 
pp.  (12);  "  Some  Nevir  Voyages,"  pp.  [i]-202;  "  Memoirs  of  North- 
America,"  pp.  203-274;  "A  Table  explaining  some  Terms  made  use 
of  in  both  Volumes,"  pp.  275-280.     No  mispaging, 

P/fl/^j.  —  Opposite  pp.  26,  43,  55,  65,  75,  89,  106,  160,  184,  and 
225 ;  small  full-page  map  of  Canada  opp.  the  title-page,  and  two  large 
folded  maps,  marked  A  and  B,  opp.  p.  i,  as  follovv^s  :  "  A  General  Map 
of  New  France  Com,  call'd  Canada,"  and  "A  Map  drawn  upon  Stag- 
skins  by  y^  Gnacfitares,"  etc. 

Signatures.  —  A  in  eight,  a  in  four,  B — S  in  eights,  T  in  four. 

Copies.  —  BA,  C. 

1735  —  English:  O shorn  issue  —  Vol.  i. 

New  I  Voyages  |  to  |  North-America.  |  Containing  1  An  Account 
of  the  feveral  Nations  of  that  vaft  Con-  |  tinent ;  their  Cuftoms,  Com- 
merce, and  Way  of  Naviga-  I  tion  upon  the  Lakes  and  Rivers ;  the 
feveral  Attempts  of  I  the  Englifh  and  French  to  difpoffefs  one  another  ; 
with  the  I  Reafons  of  the  Mifcarriage  of  the  former  ;  and  the  various  | 
Adventures  between  the  French,  and  the  Iroquefe  Confe-  |  derates  of 
England,  from  1683  to  1694.  I  A  Geographical  Defcription  of  Canada, 
and  a  |  Natural  Hiflory  of  the  Country,  with  Remarks  upon  their  | 
Government,  and  the  Intereft  of  the  Englifh  and  French  |  in  their 
Commerce.  I  Alfo  a  Dialogue  between  the  Author  and  a  General  of 
the  I  Savages,  giving  a  full  View  of  the  Religion  and  flrange  Opi-  I 
nions  of  thofe  People :  With  an  Account  of  the  Author's  Retreat  |  to 
Portugal  and  Denmark,  and  his  Remarks  on  thofe  Courts.  |  To  which 
is  added,  |  A  Dictionary  of  the  Algonkine  Language,  which  is  |  gen- 


Ixxxiv  Lahontan  Bibliography 

erally  fpoke  in  North-America.  |  Illuftrated  with  Twenty-Three  Maps 
and  Cuts.  |  Written  in  French  |  By  the  Baron  Lahontan,  |  Lord 
Lieutenant  of  the  French  Colony  at  Placentia  |  in  Newfoundland,  at 
that  Time  in  England.  |  Done  into  Englifh.  The  Second  Edition.  |  In 
Two  Volumes.  |  A  great  Part  of  which  never  Printed  in  the  Original. 
I  Vol.  L  I 

London :  |  Printed  for  J.  Osborn,  at  the  Golden-Ball,  in  Pater- 
nofler-Row.  |  M,  Dcc,  xxxv.  I 

Collation.  —  8vo  ;  title,  verso  blank  ;  "  To  His  Grace  WiUiam,"  pp. 
(2);  "The  Preface,"  pp.  (8);  "The  Contents,"  pp.  (12);  "Some 
New  Voyages  to  North-America,"  pp.  [i]-202  ;  "  Memoirs  of  North- 
America,"  pp.  203-274;  "A  Table  explaining  some  Terms  made  use 
of  in  both  Volumes,"  pp.  275-280.     No  mispaging. 

P/^j^w.  —  Opposite  pp.  26,  43,  55,  65,  75,  89,  106,  160,  and  184;  a 
small  map  oi  Canada  to  face  the  title-page ;  two  large  folded  maps  to 
face  p.  I  of  text,  as  follows:  (A)  "A  General  Map  of  New  France, 
Com,  call'd  Canada,"  and  (B)  "A  Map  drawn  upon  Stag-skins  by 
y^  Gnacfitares,"  etc.;  map  of  Newfoundland  opp.  p.  225. 

Signatures.  — A  in  eight,  a  in  four,  B — S  in  eights,  T  in  four. 

Copies.  — BM,  MHS,  NL  (two,  one  imperfect). 

173s  —  English  :  J.  Walthoe,  etc.  —  Vol.  2. 

New  I  Voyages  |  to  |  North-America.  |  Giving  a  full  Account  of 
the  Cuftoms,  |  Commerce,  Rehgion,  and  ftrange  Opinions  |  of  the 
Savages  of  that  Country.  |  With  |  Political  Remarks  upon  the  Courts 
I  of  Portugal  and  Denmark,  and  the  Prefent  State  of  |  the  Commerce 
of  thofe  Countries.  |  The  Second  Edition.  |  Written  |  By  the  Baron 
Lahontan,  Lord-Lieutenant  of  1  the  French  Colony  at  Placentia  in 
New-  I  foundland  :  Now  in  England.  |  Vol.  IL  | 


Lahontan  Bibliography  Ixxxv 

London  :  |  Printed  for  J.  Walthoe,  R.  Wilkin,  J.  and  J.  Bonwicke, 
I  J.  Osborn,  S.  Birt,  T.  Ward  and  E.  Wickfteed.     1735.  I 

Collation.  —  8vo ;  title,  verso  blank;  "A  Discourse,"  pp.  3-91; 
"A  Conference,"  pp.  92-185;  p.  [186]  blank;  "An  Appendix,"  pp. 
187-288;  "A  Short  Dictionary,"  pp.  289-304.     No  mispaging. 

Plates.  —  Frontispiece,  and  opposite  pp.5,  29,  36,  59  (two),  80, 
82,  84,  and  86. 

Signatures.  —  Aa — Tt  in  eights.     Sig.  Tts  is  misprinted  Tt4. 

Copies.— BA  (lacks  plates),  C,  MHS,  NL  (two,  one  of  which 
lacks  last  leaf). 

1 735  —  English  :  Brindley  issue  —  Vol.  i  . 

New  I  Voyages  |  to  |  North-America.  |  Containing  |  An  Account 
of  the  feveral  Nations  of  that  vaft  Con-  |  tinent ;  their  Cuftoms,  Com- 
merce, and  Way  of  Naviga-  |  tion  upon  the  Lakes  and  Rivers ;  the 
feveral  Attempts  of  |  the  Englifh  and  French  to  difpoffefs  one  another; 
with  the  1  Reafons  of  the  Mifcarriage  of  the  former  ;  and  the  various  | 
Adventures  between  the  French,  and  the  Iroquefe  Confe-  |  derates  of 
England,  from  1683  to  1694.  I  -^  Geographical  Defcription  of  Canada, 
and  a  |  Natural  Hiftory  of  the  Country,  with  Remarks  upon  |  their 
Government,  and  the  Intereft  of  the  Englifh  and  |  French  in  their 
Commerce.  |  Alfo  a  Dialogue  between  the  Author  and  a  General  1  of 
the  Savages,  giving  a  full  View  of  the  Religion  and  |  flrange  Opinions  of 
thofe  People  :  With  an  Account  of  |  the  Author's  Retreat  to  Portugal 
and  Denmark,  and  his  |  Remarks  on  thofe  Courts.  |  To  which  is  added, 
I  A  Dictionary  of  the  Algonkine  Language,  which  is  |  generally  fpoke 
in  North-America.  |  lUuftrated  with  Twenty-Three  Maps  and  Cuts.  | 
Written  in  French  |  By  the  Baron  Lahontan,  |  Lord  Lieutenant  of  the 
French  Colony  at  Placentia  |  in  Newfoundland,  at  that  Time  in  En- 


Ixxxvi  Lahontan  Bibliography 

gland.  I  Done  into  Englifh.    The  Second  Edition,  |  In  Two  Volumes. 
I  A  great  Part  of  which  never  Printed  in  the  Original.  |   Vol.  I.  | 

London  :  |  Printed  for  John  Brindley,  Bookfeller,  at  the  King's- 
Arms  I  in   New-bond-ftreet,  Bookbinder   to   her  Majefly,   and    his  | 
Royal  Highnefs  the  Prince  of  Wales ;  and  Charles  |  Corbett,  at  Addi- 
fon's-head,  Temple-bar.     1735.  I 

Collation.  —  8vo  ;  title,  verso  blank;  dedication  "To  His  Grace 
WiUiam  Duke  of  Devonshire,"  pp.  (2).  "The  Preface,"  pp.  (8); 
"The  Contents,"  pp.  (12);  "  Some  New  Voyages  to  North-America," 
pp.  [i]-202;  "Memoirs,"  pp.  203-274;  "A  Table  explaining  some 
Terms  made  use  of  in  both  Volumes,"  pp.  275-280.  No  mispaging. 
The  Carter  Brown  copy,  the  only  one  I  have  examined,  has  the  fol- 
lowing plates,  etc.: 

Plates.  — Opposite  pp.  26,  43,  65,  75,  89,  and  106  ;  a  small  map  of 
Canada  to  face  the  title-page ;  a  map  of  Newfoundland  at  p.  225  ;  and 
two  large  folded  maps  to  precede  p.  i  of  the  text,  as  follows  :  (A)  "  A 
General  Map  of  New  France  Com,  call'd  Canada,"  (B)  "A  Map 
drawn  upon  Stag-skins  by  y^  Gnacfitares,"  etc.  The  copy  examined 
apparently  lacks  plates  opposite  pp.  55,  160,  and  184. 

Signatures.  — A  in  eight,  a  in  four,  B — S  in  eights,  T  in  four. 

Copies.  —  C,  JCB. 

1735  —  English:  Brindley  issue  —  VoL.  2. 

New  I  Voyages  |  to  |  North-America.  |  Giving  a  full  Account  of 
the  Cu-  I  floms,  Commerce,  Religion,  and  ftrange  |  Opinions  of  the 
Savages  of  that  Country.  |  With  1  Political  Remarks  upon  the  Courts 
I  of  Portugal  and  Denmark,  and  the  Prefent  |  State  of  the  Commerce 
of  thofe  Countries.  |  The  Second  Edition.  |  Written  1  By  the  Baron 
Lahontan,  Lord  Lieutenant  |  of  the  French  Colony  at  Placentia  in 
New-  I  foundland  :  Now  in  England.  |  Vol.  IL  | 


Lahontan  Bibliography  Ixxxvii 

London  :  |  Printed   for  J.  Brindley,   Bookfeller,   at    the    King's  | 
Arms  in  New-bond-ftreet,  Bookbinder  to  her  Ma-  |  jefty,  and  his  Royal 
Highnefs  the  Prince  of  Wales ;  |  and  C.  Corbett,  at  Addifon's-head, 
Temple-bar.  |  M   D.  cc.  xxxv.  | 

Collation.  — 8vo;  title,  verso  blank;  "A  Discourse,"  pp.  3~9i  I 
"A  Conference  or  Dialogue,"  pp.  92-185;  p.  [186]  blank;  "An 
Appendix,"  pp.  187-288;  "A  Short  Dictionary,"  pp.  289-304-  No 
mispaging. 

Plates.  — Opposite  pp.  5,  29,  36,  59  (two),  80,  82,  84,  and  86, 
perhaps  also  a  plate  on  healing  sick  and  burying  the  dead  at  p.  51  (not 
found  in  the  Carter  Brown  copy),  and  a  frontispiece  of  an  Indian  in 
an  oval. 

Signatures.  —  Aa — Tt  in  eights. 

Copies.  —  C,  JCB. 

1739  —  Dutch  —  Vol.  i. 

Reizen  |  van  den  Faron  |  van  La  Hontan  |  in  het  |  Noordelyk  | 
Amerika,  |  Vervattende  een  Verhaal  van  verfcheide  Volke-  |  ren  die 
het  bewoonen  ;  den  aart  hunner  Re-  |  geering,  hun  Koophandel,  hun 
Ge-  I  woontens,    hun    Godsdienft,  en  |  hun   wys   van    Oorloogen.  | 
Neevens  het  Belang  der  Franfchen  en  der  Engel-  |  fchen  in  hun  Koop- 
handel met  die  Volkeren  ;  en  |   't  voordeel  dat  Engeland,  met  Vrankryk 
in  I  Oorlog  zynde,  van  dat  Land  kan  trekken.  |  Alles  met  verfcheide 
Aanteekeningen  vermeer-  |  dert  en  opgeheldert,  en  met  Kaarten  en  | 
Plaaten  verciert.  |  Eerste  Deel.  |  Vertaalt  door  |  Gerard  Westerwyk. 
I    \_Ornament^  \ 

In's  Gravenhage,  |  By  Isaac  Beauregard.     1739-  I 
Collation.  —  8vo  ;   title,  verso  blank;   "  Voorbericht  van  den  Ver- 
taaler,"  pp.  (3);  "  Korte  Inhouden,"  pp.  (7);  "  Reizen,"  pp.  [i]-28o, 
an  insert  map-key  of  four  pages  at  this  location,  and  281-582.    Pp.  58, 


Ixxxviii  Lahontan  Bibliography 

59,  62,  298,  305,  and  445  are  mispaged  59,  60,  64,  498,  30,  and  447 
respectively;  there  are  no  pp.  191  and  192.  The  ist,  3d,  6th,  I2th  to 
15th  and  2ist  lines  and  place  of  imprint  printed  in  red. 

P/fl/«.  —  Opposite  pp.  I,  65,  190  (plate  marked  192),  297,  398, 
488,  and  544;  a  large  folded  "  Carte  que  les  Gnacsitares  ont  dessine," 
etc.,  between  pp.  280  and  281. 

Signatures. —  *  in  six,  A — Nn  in  eights,  Oo  in  two,  with  an  insert 
of  two  leaves  between  S3  and  S4. 

Copies  — C,  JCB,  NL,  WHS. 

1739  —  Dutch  —  Vol.  2. 

Gedenkschriften  |  van  het  |  Noordelyk  |  Amerika,  |  of  het  ver- 
volg  der  |  Reizen  van  den  |  Baron  van  La  Hontan.  |  Vervattende  de 
Befchrj^ing  van  een  groote  I  ftreek  Land  van  dat  Weerelddeel ;  het 
Belang  |  der  Franfchen  en  der  Engelfchen  in  't  zelve ;  |  hun  Koop- 
handel,  hun  Schipvaart,  en  de  |  Zeeden  en  Gewoontens  der  Wil-  | 
den,  &c.  Alles  met  Aanteekeningen  |  vermeerdert  en  opgeheldert.  | 
Neevens  de  Zaamenfpraaken  van  den  Schryver  met  |  een  Wilden, 
en  een  Woordenboek  |  van  de  Taal  dier  Volkeren.  |  Met  Kaarten  en 
Plaaten  Verciert.  |  Tweede  Deel.  |  Vertaalt  door  |  Gerard  Westerwyk. 

I   \_Ornament\  \ 

In's  Gravenhage,  |  By  Isaac  Beauregard,  1739.  I 
Collation.  —  8vo  ;  title,  verso  blank  ;  "  Gedenkschriften,"  pp.  [i]- 
358;  half-title:  "  Saamenspraaken  |  van  den  |   Schryver  dezer  Reizen 

I  met  I  Adario  |  een  Wilden  van  Aanzien,"   etc.,   on  p.    [359];  p. 

[360]  blank;  text  of  same,  pp.  [3621-523;  "Woordenboek  van  de 
Taal  der  Wilden,"  pp.  524-552.  Pp.  91,  327,  and  427  are  misprinted 
19,  227,  and  527,  respectively.  The  ist,  4th,  7th,  15th  to  17th,  and 
2ist  lines  and  place  of  imprint  printed  in  red. 


Lahontan  Bibliography  Ixxxix 

P/fl/^j.— Opposite  pp.  178,  190,  239,  273,  297,  352,  357,  358  (long 
narrow  cut  not  numbered),  and  390;  a  "  Carte  generale  de  Canada" 
opp.  p.  5  (marked  on  plate  "Tom:  2.  P:  i"),  which  has  three 
pages  of  text  to  accompany  it  —  the  whole  intended  to  be  bound 
between  pp.  4  and  5  of  the  text. 

Signatures.  —  Title,  A— LI  in  eights,  Mm  in  four,  with  two  insert 
leaves  between  A2  and  A3. 

Copies.  — C,  JCB,  NL,  WHS. 

1 741  —  French  —  Vol.  i  . 

Voyages  |  du  Baron  |  de  Lahontan  |  dans  |  I'Amerique  |  Septen- 
trionale,  |  Qui  contiennent  une  Relation  des  difle-  |  rens  Peuples  qui  y 
habitent ;  la  nature  |  de  leur  Gouvernement ;  leur  Commer- 1  ce,  leurs 
Coutumes,  leur  Religion,  &  |  leur  maniere  de  faire  la  Guerre :  | 
L'Interet  des  Franfois  &  des  Anglois  dans  le  |  Commerce  qu'ils  font 
avec  ces  Nations,  I'a-  |  vantage  que  I'Angleterre  peut  retirer  de  ce  | 
Pais,  etant  en  Guerre  avec  la  France.  |  Le  tout  enrichi  de  Cartes 
&  de  Figures.  |  Tome  Pemier  [_sic\  \  Seconde  Edition,  reviae,  corrigee, 
&  augmentee.  |   [^Ornament]  \ 

A  Amsterdam,  |  Chez  Francois  L'Honore,  vis-a-vis  de  la  Bourfe.  | 
M.  DCC.  xxxxi.  I 

Collation.  —  i2mo  ;  title,  verso  blank  ;  "  Preface,"  pp.  (8);  "  Voy- 
ages" or  text,  pp.  1-188;  "Table  des  Lettres,"  pp.  (4).  P.  82  is 
mispaged  28.  The  ist,  3d,  5th,  6th,  12th  to  15th,  and  17th  lines  and 
place  and  date  of  imprint  printed  in  red. 

P/fi/w.  —  Opposite  pp.  14,  25,  38,  56,  87,  97,  129,  and  156,  and 
frontispiece  of  an  Indian  in  an  oval ;  a  small  "  Carte  general  du  Canada 
en  petit  point  "  opp.  p.  10. 

Signatures.  —  Title-page,  *  in  four.  A— H  in  twelves. 

Co/./«.-BE,  C,  JCB,  WHS. 


xc  Lahontan  Bibliography 

1741 —  French  — Vol.  2  (called  Vol.  3). 

Memoires  |  de  1  TAmerique  |  Septentrionale,  |  ou  la  Suite  |  des 
Voyages  de  Mr  le  |  Baron  de  Lahontan  :  |  Qui  contiennent  la  De- 
fcription  d'une  grande  |  etendue  de  Pais  de  ce  Continent,  I'interet  des 
I  Franfois  &  des  Anglois,  leurs  Commerces,  |  leurs  Navigations,  les 
MceurS  &  les  Coutu  |  tumes  [_sic]  des  Sauvages,  &c,  |  Avec  un  petit 
Dictionaire  de  la  langue  du  Pais.  |  Le  tout  enrichi  de  Cartes  &  de  Fig- 
ures. I  Tome  Troisieme.  |  Seconde  Edition,  augmentee  de  la  maniere 
dont  I  les  Sauvages  fe  regalent.  |   [_Cut,  a  double  cornucopia]  \ 

A  Amsterdam,  |  Chez  Francois  I'Honore  &  Compagnie.  |  M.  DCC. 
xxxxi.  I 

Collation.— 'i2mo;  title,  verso  blank;  "Memoires,"  pp.  1-218; 
"  Dictionnaire  de  la  Langue  des  Sauvages,"  pp.  219-237,  with  verso  of 
p.  237  blank.  No  mispaging.  The  ist,  3d,  6th  7th,  13th,  and  15th 
lines  and  place  and  date  of  imprint  printed  in  red. 

P/fl/a.  —  Opposite  pp.  51,  103,  no,  137,  142,  166,  191,  208,  209, 
and  210;  a  large  folded  "  Carte  generale  de  Canada"  opp.  p.  i. 

Signatures.  — T'wXq,  A— K  in  twelves  (the  last  leaf  blank). 

Copies.  —  BE,  C,  HC,  JCB,  WHS. 

1 741  —French  — Vol.  3  (called  Vol.  2). 

Suite  I  des  Voyages  |  du  Baron  1  de  Lahontan  |  dans  |  I'Amerique 
I  Septentrionale,  |  Qui  contiennent  une  Relation  des  difiEe-  |  rens 
Peuples  qui  y  habitent ;  la  nature  |  de  leur  Gouvernement ;  leur 
Commer-  |  ce  leurs  Coutumes,  leur  Religion,  &  |  leur  maniere  de 
faire  la  Guerre :  L'Interet  des  Franfois  &  des  Anglois  dans  le  |  Com- 
merce qu'ils  font  avec  ces  Nations,  I'a-  |  vantage  que  I'Angleterre 
peut  retirer  de  ce  |  Pais,  etant  en  Guerre  avec  la  France.  |  Le  tout 
enrichi  de  Cartes  &  de  Figures.  |  Tome  Second.  |  Seconde  Edition, 
revue,  corrigee,  &  augmentee.  |   \_Ornament'\  \ 


Lahontan  Bibliography  xci 

A  Amsterdam,  |    Chez  Francois  I'Honore,  vis-a-vis  de  la  Bourfe.  I 
M.  DCC,  xxxxi.  I 

Collation.  —  i2mo  ;  title,  verso  blank  ;  "  Table  des  Lettres  du  Tome 
Second,"  pp.  (4);  "Suite,"  pp.  1-210;  "Explication  de  quelques 
Termes,"  pp.  211-220.  No  mispaging.  The  2d,  4th,  6th,  7th,  13th 
to  i6th,  and  i8th  lines  and  place  and  date  of  imprint  printed  in  red. 

Plates.  —  Opposite  pp.  23,  38,  172,  and  175;  a  "Carte  que  les 
Gnacsitares  ont  Dessine,"  etc.  opp.  p.  i. 

Signatures.  —  Title  and  tvv^o  leaves,  A — I  in  twelves,  K  in  tw^o 

Copies.  — ^E,  C,  JCB,  WHS. 

1757  —  French:  Extract. 
Voiage  du    Baron  de  la  Hontan  sur  la  Riviere  Longue. 

The  above  marginal  title  belongs  to  a  short  extract  in  the  original 
quarto  edition  of  Histoire  General  des  Foiages,  ou  Nouvelle  Collection 
de  toutes  les  Relations  de  Foiages,  edited  by  Antoine  Francois  Prevost 
d'Exiles.     It  is  found  in  vol.  xiv  (Paris:   Chez   Didot,    1757),   pp. 

719-729. 

This  French  collection  of  voyages  vs^as  also  issued  in  duodecimo  — 
Paris:  Chez  Didot,  1749-1789,  80  vols,  of  text;  in  quarto  —  J  La 
Haye :  Chez  Pierre  De  Hondt,  1 747-1 780,  25  vols.  It  appeared  in 
Dutch  — In' s  Gravenhage  :  By  Pieter  de  Hondt,  1 747-1 767,  21  vols., 
quarto;  in  German  —  Leipzig:  Arkstee  und  Merkus,  1 747-1 774,  21 
vols.,  quarto;  and  in  Spanish  —  En  Aladrid :  En  la  Imprenta  de  Don 
Juan  Antonio  Lozano,  1763-1791,  28  vols.,  quarto. 

1758  —  German  :  Extract. 

Reife  des  Barons  de  la  Hontan  auf  dem  langen  Flufle.  I 
This  is  the  heading  of  an  extract  in  vol.  16  of  the  "  Allgemeine 
Hiftorie  |  der    Reifen   zu  Waffcr  und    Lande ;  |  oder  |  Sammlung  | 
aller  |  Reifebefchreibungen,  I   \_etc.'\  Leipzig,  bey  Arkflee  und  Merkus. 


xcii  Lahontan  Bibliography 

1758.  I  "  This  is  the  German  translation  of  Prevost's  collection,  q.  v. 
under  1757.  The  German  editor  was  Johann  Joachim  Schwabe. 
Lahontan  begins  the  fourth  "Abschnitt"  of  the  twelfth  chapter, 
on  p.  694.     Described  from  a  copy  in  BA. 

1 8 12  —  English  :  Abridgment. 

Travels  in  Canada  ;  |  by  the  Baron  Lahontan.  | 

Such  is  the  heading  of  this  abridgment  in  John  Pinkerton's  "  A 
General  Collection  of  the  best  and  most  interesting  Voyages  and 
Travels  in  all  Parts  of  the  World  ;  *  *  *  Volume  the  thirteenth.  *  *  * 
London :  Printed  for  Longman,  Hurst,  Rees,  Orme,  and  Brown, 
Paternoster-Row;  and  Cadell  and  Davies,  in  the  Strand.  i8i2."  A 
foot-note  shows  that  the  English  edition  (London,  1735)  was  used  as 
the  source  of  the  text.  It  extends  from  pp.  254-373.  Good  illus- 
trations are  included  as  follows:  "Coffer  of  Perotte,"  opp.  p.  266; 
double  plate,  "On  the  River  St.  Lawrence"  and  "Characteristic 
Scenery  of  the  Hudson  River,"  opp.  p.  271  ;  "Falls  of  Niagara,"  which 
is  "Engraved  by  G.  Cooke,  from  an  Original  Drawing,"  opp.  p.  296. 

1831  —  Italian  —  Vols,  i  and  2. 

Viaggi  I  del  |  Barone  di  Lahontan  |  nell'America  Settentrionale  | 
Tradotti    dal   Francese  |  dal  gia  Capitano  Italiano  |  A.  F.  |  Volume 
Primo  [Secondo]  | 

Milano  |  Per  G.  Truffi  e  Comp.  |  1831  I 

Collation.  —  2  vols.;  small  8vo;  Vol.  i  :  Half-title:  "Viaggi  |  del  | 
Barone  di  Lahontan,"  verso  blank;  title,  verso  blank;  "Viaggi"  or 
text  (Letters  I-XV) ,  pp.  [5]-2i5  ;  "  Indice,"  on  verso  of  p.  215.     No 
plates  or  maps. 

Signatures.  —  Two  unmarked  signatures  in  eights,  2-12  in  eights, 
13  in  four. 


Lahontan  Bibliography  xciii 

Vol.2:  Half-title,  verso  blank;  title,  verso  blank;  text  (Letters 
XVI-XXV),  pp.  [5]-20i  ;  "  Indice,"  p.  202.     No  plates  or  maps. 

Signatures. —  [i]  in  four,  2-12  in  eights,  13  in  four,  13*  in  six 
(last  leaf  blank). 

Printed  paper  covers,  with  cut  of  a  globe  on  a  stand ;  that  of  vol.  2 
is  dated  "  M.  DCCC.  xxxil."  This  is  a  translation  of  the  first  volume  of 
the  French  work,  or  series  of  twenty-five  letters.  The  only  copy  I 
have  seen  is  in  the  Library  of  Congress. 

igoo  —  French. 

Un  Outre-Mer  I  au  xvii*  Siecle  |  Voyages  au  Canada  |  Du  Baron 
de  La  Hontan  |  publies  |  Avec  une  Introduction  et  des  Notes  |  par  | 
M.  Franfois  de  Nion  |  [Printers'  mark]  \ 

Paris  I  Librairie  Plon  |  Plon-Nourrit  et  C'^,  Imprimeurs-Editeurs  | 
Rue  Garanciere,  8  |   1900  I  Tous  droits  reserves  | 

Collation.  —  8vo ;  cover-title,  verso  blank;  half-title,  with  list  of 
works  by  the  same  editor,  etc.,  on  verso;  title,  verso  blank;  "Intro- 
duction," pp.  [v]-xix;  one  blank  page;  text  pp.  [i]-33i ;  P-  [332] 
blank;  "Table  des  Matieres,"  pp.  [333]-338;  colophon,  with  verso 
blank  ;  list  of  publications  by  the  same  publishing  house,  on  last  cover, 
with  recto  blank.     No  mispaging. 

Signatures.  — Cover-title,  half-title,  title,  a  in  eight,  i — 2i  in  eights, 
22  in  two,  last  cover.  This  work  is  arranged  under  twenty-five  letters. 
It  is  not  a  full  reprint  of  Lahontan,  but  presents  parts  of  his  work,  with 
interpretations  in  the  narrative.  There  are  no  maps  or  plates,  and  the 
editorial  notes  are  sparse. 

Described  from  a  copy  in  NL. 


NEW 

VOYAGES 

T  O 

North-America. 

CONTAINING 

An  Account  of  the  feveral  Nations  of  chat  vaft  Con- 
tinent ;  their  Cuiioms,  Commerce,  and  Way  of 
Navigation  upon  the  Lakes  and  Rivers  ;  the  feve- 
ral  Attempts  of  the  Engli(h  and  French  to  difpoilefs 
one  another  ;  with  the  Reafons  of  the  Mifcarriage 
of  the  former ;  and  the  various  Adventures  be- 
tween the  French y  and  the  Irotjuefe  Confederates  of 
England,  from    i68;  to  1694. 
A  Geographical  Defcription  of  Canada,  and  a  Natu- 
ral Hiftory  of  the  Country,  with  Remarks  upon 
their  Government^  and  the  Intereft  of  the  Engli^} 
and  French  in  their  Commerce. 
AJfoa  Dialogue  between  the  Author  and  a  General  of  the 
Savages,  giving  a  full  View  of  the  Religion  and  ftrange 
Opinions  of  thofe  People  :  With  an  Account  of  the  Au- 
thors Retreat  to  Portugal  and  Deiimat\  and  his  Remarks 
on  thofe  Courts. 

To  which  is  added, 
A  D'.dionary  of  the  Alg&nkjne  Language,  which  is  generally 
Ipoke  in  North' America. 


Illuftrated  with  Twenty  Three  Mapps  and  Cutis. 
Written  in  French 

By  the  Baron  Lahontan,  Lord  Lievtenant 
of  the  French  Colony  at  Flacentia  ia  l^eiV' 
foundlandy  now  in  England. 

Done  into  EngliPo. 


In   Two   VOLUMES. 

A  great  part  of  which  never  Printed  in  the  Original. 


LO  ^7D0iV ;  Printed  for  H.  Btnwicke  in  Sz.  PauVs  Church-yaid  ; 
T.  Goodwin^  At.  H^otten,  B,  Jooif,  in  Fleet (Irtet  ;  and  5.  Manjh/^ 
in  Cornhil,  1703. 


To  His  Grace 

WILLIAM 

Duke  of  Devon/hire  J 

Lord  Steward  of  Her  Majejlies  Houfehold^  Lord  Lieutenant  of  the 
County  of  Derby,  Chief  Juflice  in  Eyre  of  all  Her  Majefiies 
Forrefls^  Chafes^  Parks^  &c.  Trent-North ;  One  of  the  Lords 
of  Her  Majefiies  Mofl  Honourable  Privy  Council^  and  Knight 
of  the  Mofl  Honourable  Order  of  the  Garter} 

My  Lord, 

SINCE  I  had  the  Honour  to  prefent  the  King  of  Denmark 
with  the  firft  part  of  this  Book,  I  prefume  to  make  a 
Prefent  of  the  Latter  to  your  Grace.^  In  making  the  firft 
Dedication,  I  had  no  other  inducement,  than  a  due  regard  to 


1  Unlike  Hennepin,  Lahontan  did  not  present  his  book  directly  to  the  ruler  of 
England,  but  chose  rather  as  patron  one  of  the  great  Whig  lords,  who  was  distin- 
guished for  his  taste  in  art  and  letters,  and  was  a  critic  of  some  note.  William  Cav- 
endish, duke  of  Devonshire,  had  been  active  in  politics  since  the  reign  of  Charles  II. 
A  private  quarrel,  as  well  as  public  wrongs,  had  estranged  him  from  James  II ;  he 
w-as  one  of  the  chief  supporters  of  the  Revolution  of  1688,  and  high  in  favor  at  the 
courts  both  of  William  III  and  of  Anne.  Next  to  the  English  ruler,  Lahontan  could 
have  applied  to  no  more  popular  or  more  powerful  patron.  —  Ed. 

2  Frederick  IV,  one  of  the  best-known  princes  of. his  day,  was  also  a  savant  and 
connoisseur.  He  had  received  Lahontan  at  his  court,  and  protected  him  in  need. 
Lahontan  refers  here  to  the  first  edition,  rather  than  the  "  first  part  "  of  his  book — 
the  edition  which  appeared  at  the  Hague  (in  French)  early  in  1703.  —  Ed. 


4  The  Dedication, 

the  benefits  I  recelv'd  from  His  Majefties  favour ;  and  the 
fame  Motive  with  reference  to  your  Grace,  has  prompted  me 
to  make  this  acknowledgment  of  the  undeferved  Favours  you 
kindly  vouchfaf'd  me. 

I  did  not  dare  to  launch  out  Into  the  praife  of  His  Dani/h 
Majefty,  who  has  a  juft  Title  to  all  forts  of  Encomiums  ;  by 
reafon  that  the  little  French  I  had,  has  been  forgot  among  a 
fort  of  People,  that  take  Panegyrlcks  to  be  Affronts.  'Tis 
with  the  fame  view.  My  Lord,  that  I  decline  the  pleafure  of 
publifhing  thofe  diftinguifhing  Qualities,  that  place  Your 
Lordfhip  at  the  Head  of  the  Moft  Accomplifh'd  Grandees  of 
the  World,  and  the  Moft  Zealous  Patriots  of  their  Country. 

/  am  with  all  Gratitude  and  Veneration, 
My  Lord, 

Tour  Grace^Sy 

Moft  Humble,  and  Moft 
Obedient  Servant. 

Lahontan. 


THE 

PREFACE. 

HAVING  flatter' d  my  felf  with  the  vain  hopes  of  retrieving  the 
King  of  France's  favour^  before  the  Declaration  of  this 
War  ;'^  I  was  fo  far  from  thinking  to  put  thefe  Letters^  and  Me- 
moirs^ to  the  Prefs ;  that  I  defign'd  to  have  committed  'em  to  the 
flames^  if  that  Monarch  had  done  me  the  honour  of  reinftating  me 
in  my  former  Places^  with  the  good  leave  of  Meffieurs  de  Pont- 

chartrain  *   the   Father  and  the   Son}        ^  ^,  ^,        ,.       , 

'  ^  The  one  Lbancellor  of 

'Twas  with  that  view  that  I  neglected     France,  and  the  other  See- 
to  put  'em  in  fuch  a  drefs  as  might  now     retary  of  State :   Both  of 
be  wi/h'd  for,  for  the  fatisfa^tion  of  the     ''^  '^''fi^y  '^''^■ 
Reader  that  gives  himfelf  the  trouble  to  perufe  'em. 

1  The  reference  is  to  the  War  of  the  Spanish  Succession  (in  America,  called 
Queen  Anne's  War),  which  began  in  1703  between  France  and  Spain  on  the  one 
hand,  and  England,  Austria,  and  Holland  on  the  other,  involving  in  its  course 
most  European  powers.    It  was  terminated  by  the  treaty  of  Utrecht  (1713).  —  Ed. 

2  After  the  able  ministers  who  served  during  the  vigor  of  his  reign,  those  chosen 
by  Louis  XIV  during  his  old  age  were  mediocre  in  talent.  The  two  Counts  of  Pont- 
chartrain  belonged  to  this  latter  class.  Louis  Phelypeaux  the  elder  was  born  in  1643, 
and  early  entered  the  public  service;  in  1689  he  became  comptroller-general  of 
finance,  and  the  following  year  minister  of  the  marine,  with  charge  of  colonial  affairs. 
His  son  Jerome  (born  in  1674)  became  secretary  of  state  in  1693,  and  upon  his 
father's  promotion  to  the  chancellorship  (1699),  succeeded  to  the  latter's  offices. 
Thus  during  the  latter  years  of  Louis  XIV  the  Pontchartrains  were  the  most  powerful 
ministers  of  the  court.  Both  lost  their  offices  upon  the  demise  of  the  king  (1715)1 
the  elder  dying  in  1727,  the  younger  in  1717.  —  Ed. 


6  The  Preface. 

Between  the  fifteenth  and  fixteenth  year  of  my  Age  I  went  to 
Canada,  and  there  took  care  to  keep  up  a  conflant  Correfpondence 
by  Letters  with  an  old  Relation^  who  had  required  of  me  a  Narra- 
tive of  the  Occurrences  of  that  Country,  upon  the  account  of  the 
yearly  affiftance  he  gave  me.  '  Tis  thefe  very  Letters  that  make  the 
greatefi  part  of  the  firfl  Folum.  They  contain  an  account  of  all  that 
pafs'd  between  the  Englifh,  the  French,  the  Iroquefe,  and  the 
other  Savage  Nations,  from  the  year  1683,  to  1694.  Together  with 
a  great  many  curious  Remarks,  that  may  be  of  life  to  thofe  who  have 
any  knowledge  of  the  Englifn  or  French  Colonies. 

The  whole  is  writ  with  a  great  deal  of  Fidelity;  for  I  reprefent 
things  jufi  as  they  are.  I  neither  flatter  nor  f pare  any  Perfon  what- 
foever ;  I  attribute  to   the  *  Iroquefe,         ,  ^     ,.^ 

the  glory  they  have  purchafed  on  feveral     .^  New-York,  Mahak. 
occafions,  tho'  at  the  fame  time  I  hate 

that  Rafcally  People,  as  much  as  Horns  and  Law-Suits.  Notwith- 
ftanding  the  Veneration  I  have  for  the  Clergy,  I  impute  to  them  all 
the  mifchief  the  Iroquefe  have  done  to  the  French  Colonies,  in  the 
courfe  of  a  War  that  had  never  been  undertaken,  if  it  had  not  been 
for  the  Connfels  of  thefe  pious  Church-Men. 

The  Reader  is  defir'd  to  take  notice  that  the  Towns  of  New- 
York,  are  known  to  the  French  by  their  old  Names  only,  and  for 
that  reafon  I  was  oblig'd  to  make  ufe  of  the  fame  in  my  Letters,  as 
well  as  my  Mapps.  They  give  the  name  of  New-York  to  all  that 
Country,  that  reaches  from  the  Source  of  its  River  to  the  Mouth, 
that  is,  to  the  Ifland,  upon  which  there  ftands  a  City  calVd  in  the  time 
of  the  Dutch  Manathe,  and  now  by  the  Enghfh,  New-York. 


The  Preface.  7 

In  like  manner  the  Plantation  0/ Albany,  that  lies  towards  the  bead 
of  the  River ^  is  calVd  by  the  French,  Orange. 

Farther;  I  would  not  have  the  Reader  to  take  it  amifs,  that  the 
thoughts  of  the  Savages  are  fet  forth  in  an  European  Drefs.  The 
occafton  of  that  choice  proceeded  from  the  Relation  I  Correfponded 
with;  for  that  honefl  Gentleman  ridiculed  the  Metaphorical  Ha- 
rangue of  the  *  Grangula;  and  intreated 
me  not  to  make  a  literal  iranjlatton  of 

a  Language  that  vjas  fo  fluff'd  with  Fi5lions  and  Savage  Hyper- 
boles. 'Tis  for  this  reafon  that  all  the  Difcourfes  and  Arguments  of 
thofe  Nations^  are  here  accommodated  to  the  European  Style  and  way 
of  Speaking  ;  for  having  comply' d  with  my  Friend's  Requefl,  I  con- 
tented my  f elf  in  keeping  only  a  Copy  of  the  Letters  I  writ  to  him, 
during  my  Pilgrimage  in  the  Country  of  thefe  naked  Philofophers. 

'Twill  not  be  improper  to  acquaint  the  Reader  by  the  bye^  that 
thofe  who  know  my  faults,  do  as  little  juflice  to  thefe  People,  as  they 
do  to  me,  in  alledging  I  am  a  Savage  my  felf,  and  that  that  makes 
me  fpeak  fo  favourably  of  my  Fellow-Savages.  Thefe  Obfervators 
do  me  a  great  deal  of  Honour,  as  long  as  they  do  not  explain  them- 
felves,  fo  as  to  make  me  dire^ly  of  the  fame  Character  with  that 
which  is  tack'd  to  the  word  Savage  by  the  Europeans  in  their  way 
of  thinking:  For  in  faying  only  that  I  am  of  the  fame  temper  with 
the  Savages,  they  give  me  without  dejign,  the  Character  of  the  hon- 
eflefl  Man  in  the  JVorld.  'Tis  an  uncontefled  truth,  that  the  Nations 
which  are  not  debauch'd  by  the  Neighbourhood  of  the  Europeans, 
are  flrangers  to  the  Meafures  of  Meum  and  Tuum,  and  to  all 
Laws,  Judges,  and  Priefls.     This  can't  be  call'd  in  queflion,  fince 


8  The  Preface. 

all  Travellers  that  have  vifited  thofe  Countries,  vouch  for  its  truth  ; 
and  a  great  many  of  different  Profeffions,  have  given  the  World 
repeated  affurances  that  'tis  fo.  Now  this  being  granted,  we  ought 
not  to  fcruple  to  believe,  that  thefe  are  fuch  wife  and  reafonable 
People.  I  take  it,  a  Man  miifl  be  quite  blind,  who  do's  not  fee  that 
the  property  of  Goods  (I  do  not  fpeak  of  the  ingroffing  of  Women) 
is  the  only  Source  of  all  the  Difordejs  that  perplex  the  European 
Societies.  Upon  that  Confideration  'twill  be  eafie  to  perceive,  that  I 
have  not  fpoke  wide  in  defcribing  that  Wifdom  and  Acutenefs  which 
fhines  through  the  Words  and  Actions  of  thefe  poor  Americans.  // 
all  the  World  had  accefs  to  the  Books  of  Voyages,  that  are  found  in 
fome  well  flock' d  Libraries^  they  would  find  in  above  a  hundred  De- 
fcriptions  of  Canada,  an  infinity  of  Difcourfes  and  Arguments  offer' d 
by  the  Savages,  which  are  incomparably  flronger,  and  more  nervous 
than  thofe  I've  inferted  in  my  Memoirs. 

As  for  fuch  as  doubt  of  the  Inflin5i  and  wonderful  capacity  of 
Beavers,  they  need  only  to  cafl  their  Eyes  upon  the  Great  Map  of 
America,  drawn  by  the  Sieur  de  Fer,  and  grav'd  at  Paris  in  the 
year  1698.^  Where  they  will  meet  with  feveral  furprifing  things, 
relating  to  thefe  Animals. 

While  my  Book  was  a  Printing  in  Holland,  /  was  in  England  ; 
and  as  foon  as  it  appear' d,  feveral  Englifh  Gentlemen  of  a  diftin- 
guifhing  Merit,  who  underfland  the  French  as  well  as  their  Mother 
Tongue,  gave  me  to  know,  that  they  would  be  glad  to  fee  a  more 


^  Nicolas  de  Fer  (1646-1720)  was  a  well-known  cartographer  of  his  time,  bearing 
the  title  of  royal  geographer  of  Belgium  (1701-16).  His  maps  were  more  noted  for 
the  adornment  of  their  borders,  and  their  picturesque  appearance,  than  for  accuracy. 
Lahontan  doubtless  refers  to  engravings  of  beavers  which  ornament  the  margin  of  the 
chart  here  cited.  —  Ed. 


The  Preface.  9 

ample  Relation  of  the  Manners  and  Ciijioms  of  the  People  of  that 
Continent^  whom  we  call  by  the  name  of  Savages.  This  oblig'd  me 
to  communicate  to  thefe  Gentlemen^  the  fitbflance  of  the  feveral  Con- 
ferences I  had  in  that  Country  with  a  certain  Huron,  whom  the 
French  call  Rat.  JFhile  I  flay'd  at  that  American'i  Village,  I 
imploy'd  my  time  very  agreeably  in  making  a  careful  Colle5lion  of 
all  his  Arguments  and  Opinions  ;  and  as  foon  as  I  return' d  from  my 
Voyage  upon  the  Lakes  of  Canada,  /  fhew'd  my  Manufcript  to 
Count  Frontenac,  who  was  fo  pleas'd  with  it,  that  he  took  the  pains 
to  afjijl  me  in  digefling  the  Dialogues,  and  bringing  them  into  the 
order  they  now  appear  in  ^ :  For  before  that,  they  were  abrupt  Con- 
ferences without  Connexion.  Upon  the  Solicitation  of  thefe  Engllfh 
Gentlemen,  I've  put  thefe  Dialogues  into  the  hands  of  the  Perfon 
who  tranflated  my  Letters  and  Memoirs  :  And  if  it  had  not  been  for 
their  pr effing  Liflances,  they  had  never  feen  the  light ;  for  there  are 
but  few  in  the  IForld  that  will  judge  impartially,  and  without  pre- 
poffeffion,  of  fome  things  contain'd  in  'em. 

I  have  likewife  intrufled  the  fame  Tranflator  with  fome  Remarks 
that  I  made  in  Portugal,  and  Denmark,  when  I  fled  thither  from 
Newfound-Land.  There  the  Reader  will  meet  with  a  defcription 
of  Lisbon  and  Copenhagen,  and  of  the  capital  City  of  Arragon. 

To  the  Transflation  of  my  firfl  Volume,  I  have  added  an  exa5l 
Map  of  Newfound-Land,  which  was  not  in  the  Original.  I  have 
likewife  corre5fed  almofl  all  the  Cuts  of  the  Holland  Impreffion,  for 


1  Frontenac's  responsibility  for  the  famous  dialogue  between  Lahontan  and  the 
Huron  has  been  much  discussed.  Without  doubt,  the  governor  of  Canada  permitted 
himself  liberties  in  religious  thought,  and  enjoyed  Lahontan's  clever  flings  against 
the  Jesuits  ;  but  it  can  hardly  be  held  that  all  the  sentiments  expressed  by  the  traveller 
accorded  with  his  own.  —  Ed. 


lo  The  Preface. 

the  Dutch  Gravers  had  murder'd  'em,  by  not  underftanding  their 
Explications,  which  were  all  in  French.  They  have  grav'd  Women 
for  Men,  and  Men  for  Women;  naked  Perfons  for  thofe  that  are 
cloath'd,  and  e  Contra.  j4s  for  the  Maps,  the  Reader  will  find 
'em  very  exa^ ;  And  I  have  taken  care  to  have  the  Tra5ls  of  my 
Voyages  more  nicely  delineated,  than  in  the  Original. 

I  underfland  by  Letters  from  Paris,  that  the  two  Mejfieurs 
de  Pontchartrain  indeavour  by  all  means  to  be  reveng'd  upon  me 
for  the  affront  they  say  I  have  given  'em  in  publi/Iiing  fome  triffling 
Stories  in  my  Book,  that  ought  to  have  been  conceal' d.  I  am  likewife 
inform'd,  that  I  have  reafon  to  be  apprehenfive  of  the  Refentment 
of  fever al  Ecclefiaflicks,  who  pretend  I  have  infulted  God  in  cenf tir- 
ing their  Conduct.  Butfince  I  expelled  nothing  lefs  than  the  furious 
Refentment  both  of  the  one  and  the  other,  when  I  put  this  Book  to 
the  Prefs ;  I  had  time  enough  to  arm  w,yf elf  from  top  to  toe,  in  order 
to  make  head  againfl  'em.  'Tis  my  comfort,  that  I  have  writ  nothing 
but  what  I  make  good  by  Authentick  proofs  ;  befides,  that  I  could  not 
have  f aid  lefs  of  'em  than  I  have  done;  for  if  I  had  not  tied  my  f elf 
up  to  the  direct  thread  of  my  Difcourfe,  I  could  have  made  Digref- 
fions,  in  which  the  Conduct  both  of  the  one  and  the  other,  would 
have  appear  d  to  be  prejudicial  to  the  repofe  of  the  Society,  and  the 
publick  Good.  I  had  provocation  enough  to  have  treated  'em  in  that 
manner ;  but  my  Letters  being  addrefs'd  to  an  old  Bigotted  Relation 
of  mine,  who  fed  upon  Devotion,  and  dreaded  the  influence  of  the 
Court;  he  ftill  befeech'd  me  to  write  nothing  to  him  that  might  dif- 
oblige  the  Clergy  or  the  Courtiers,  for  fear  of  the  intercepting  of  my 
Letters.  However,  I  have  advice  from  Paris,  that  fome  Pedants 
are  fet  at  work  to  lafli  me  in  writing;  and  fo  I  muft  prepare  toftand 


The  Preface.  n 

the  brunt  of  a  fliower  of  affronts,  that  will  be  pour'd  upon  me  in  a 
few  days.  But  'tis  no  matter;  I  am  fo  good  a  Conjurer,  that  I  can 
ward  off  any  florm  from  the  fide  of  Paris.  /  laugh  at  their 
Threats;  and  fince  I  can't  make  ufe  of  my  Sword,  I'll  wage  War 
with  my  Fen. 

This  I  only  mention  by  the  bye,  in  this  my  Preface  to  the  Reader, 
whom  I  pray  the  Heavens  to  Crown  with  Profperity,  in  preferving 
him  from  having  any  bufinefs  to  adjufl  with  mofi  of  the  Miniflers 
of  State,  and  Priefts ;  for  let  them  be  never  fo  faulty,  they'll  flill  be 
faid  to  be  in  the  right,  till  fuch  time  as  Anarchy  be  introduc' d  amongft 
us,  as  well  as  //.>£  Americans,  among  whom  the  forrycfl  fellow  thinks 
him f elf  a  better  Man,  than  a  Chancellor  of  France.  Thefe  People 
are  happy  in  being  fcreen'd  from  the  tricks  and  fliifts  of  Miniflers, 
who  are  always  Maflers  where-ever  they  come.  I  envy  the  fiate  of 
a  poor  Savage,  who  tramples  upon  Laws,  and  pays  Homage  to  no 
Scepter.  I  wi/h  I  could  fpend  the  reft  of  my  Life  in  his  Hutt,  and 
fo  be  no  longer  expos' d  to  the  chagrin  of  bending  the  knee  to  a  fet  of 
Men,  that  facrifice  the  publick  good  to  their  private  intereft,  and  are 
born  to  plague  honeft  Men.  The  two  Miniflers  of  State  I  have 
to  do  with,  have  been  folicited  in  vain,  by  the  Duchefs  of  Lude, 
Cardinal  Bouillon,  Count  Guifcar,  Mr.  de  Quiros,  and  Count 
d'  Avaux^:  Nothing  could  prevail,  tho'  all  that  is  laid  to  my 
charge,  confifls  only  in  not  bearing  the  affronts  of  a  Governour, 
zvhom  they  protect ;  at  a  time  when  a  hundred  other  Officers,  who 


1  These  patrons  who  spoke  on  behalf  of  Lahontan  were  among  the  eminent  per- 
sonages of  the  court  of  Louis  XIV.  The  Count  de  Lude  was  grand  master  of  artillery, 
his  wife  a  friend  of  Madame  de  Frontenac.  Cardinal  Bouillon  was  the  younger  son 
of  the  great  Turenne,  a  prominent  supporter  of  Fenelon  ;  at  this  time  he  was  in  a  sort 
of  honorable  exile  in   Holland,  as  was  likewise  Count  Guiscard,  a  diplomat  and 


12  The  Preface. 

live  tinder  the  imputation  of  Crimes^  infinitely  greater  than  mine,  are 
excused  for  three  Months  abfence  from  Court}  Now  the  Reafon  is, 
that  they  give  lefs  quarter  to  thofe  who  have  the  misfortune  to  dif- 
pleafe  the  two  Mejfieurs  de  Ponchartrain.  than  to  fuch  as  a3 
contrary  to  the  King's  Orders. 

But  after  all  my  Misfortunes,  I  have  this  to  folace  me,  that  I 
injoy  in  England  a  fort  of  Liberty,  that  is  not  met  with  elfewhere: 
For  one  may  juftly  fay,  that  of  all  the  Countries  inhabited  by  civil- 
is'd  People,  this  alone  affords  the  greatefl  perfection  of  Liberty.  Nay, 
I  do  not  except  the  liberty  of  the  Mind,  for  I  am  convinced,  that  the 
Englifh  maintain  it  with  a  great  deal  of  tendernefs:  So  true  it  is, 
that  all  degrees  of  Slavery  are  abhorr'd  by  this  People,  who  fliew 
their  IFifdom  in  the  precautions  they  take  to  prevent  their  finking 
into  a  fatal  Servitude. 


politician  of  some  fame.  Don  Francesco  Bernardo  de  Quiros  was  Spanish  ambassa- 
dor at  the  Hague  ;  and  Count  d'Avaux  had  long  been  French  minister  at  the  same 
court,  retiring  upon  William  Ill's  invasion  of  England  (1688),  and  again  upon  the 
outbreak  of  the  War  of  Spanish  Succession  (1703).  It  was  he  who  accompanied 
James  II  (1689)  to  Ireland,  as  representative  of  Louis  XIV.  —  Ed. 

1  Lahontan  here  refers  to  his  disagreement  with  Brouillan,  governor  of  Newfound- 
land, and  his  own  departure  thence  without  leave.  — Ed. 


THE 

CONTENTS. 

VOL.    I. 

[Original  pagination  retained.] 


LETTER    I. 

Dated  at  Quebec  Nov.  8.  1683. 

CONTAINING  a  Defcription  of  the  Paffage  from  France  to 
Canada  ;  with  fome  Remarks  upon  the  Coafts^  Channels,  &c. 
and  the  variation  of  the  Needle.  p.  i. 

LETTER    II. 

Dated  at  the  Canton  of  Beaupri  May  2.  1684. 

Containing  a  Defcription  of  the  Plantations  of  Canada,  and  the 

manner  in  which  they  were  firfl  form'd :    As  alfo  an  Account  of 

the  Tranfportation  of  IFhores  from  France  to  that  Country  ; 

together  with  a  view  of  its  Climate  and  Soil.  p.  7. 

LETTER.    III. 

Dated  at  Quebec  May  15.  1684. 
Containing  an  ample  Defcription  of  the  City  of  Quebec,  and  of  the 
Ifland  of  St.  Laurence.  p.  n. 


14  The  Contents. 

LETTER.    IV. 

Dated  at  Monreal  June  14.  1684. 

Containing  a  brief  Defcription  of  the  Habitations  of  the  Savages  in 
the  Neighbourhood  of  Quebec  ;  of  the  River  of  St.  Laurence, 
as  far  up  as  Monreal;  of  a  curious  way  of  fifiing  Eels;  and 
of  the  Cities  of  Trois  Rivieres,  and  Monreal :  Together  with 
an  account  of  the  Conduct  of  the  Forrefl-Rangers  or  Pedlers. 

p.  16. 
LETTER.     V. 
Dated  at  Monreal  June  18.  1684. 

In  which  is  contain'd  a  fhort  account  of  the  Iroquefe,  vAth  a  view 
of  the  War  and  Peace  they  made  vAth  the  French,  and  of  the 
means  by  which  it  was  brought  about.  p.  22. 

LETTER.    VL 

Dated  at  Monreal  June  20.  1684. 

Being  an  ample  Defcription  of  the  Canows  made  of  Birch  Bark^  in 
zvhich  the  Canadans  perform  all  their  Voyages;  with  an  Account 
of  the  manner  in  which  they  are  made  and  manag'd.        p.  26. 

LETTER.    Vn. 

Dated  at  Monreal  Novemb.  2.  1684. 

Defcribing  the  River  of  St.  Laurence,  from  Monreal  to  the  firfl 
great  Lake  of  Canada,  with  the  PFater-falls,  Cataracts,  and 
Navigation  of  that  River :  As  alfo  Fort  Frontenac,  and  the 
advantages  that  accrue  from  it.     Together  with  a  Circumfian- 


The  Contents.  15 

tial  account  of  the  Expedition  of  Mr.  de  la  Barre,  the  Gov- 
ernour  General^  againfl  the  Iroquefe  ;  the  Speeches  he  made, 
the  Replies  he  receiv'd,  and  the  final  Accommodation  of  the  dif- 
ference. P-  29. 

LETTER.    VIII. 

Dated  at  Monreal  June  28.  1685. 

Reprefenting  the  Fortifications  of  Monreal,  and  the  indifcreet  zeal 
of  the  Priefts,  who  are  Lords  of  that  Town :  With  a  Defcrip- 
tion  of  Chambli,  and  of  the  Commerce  of  the  Savages  upon  the 
great  Lakes.  p.  45. 

LETTER.     IX. 

Dated  at  Boucherville  0^.  2.  1685. 

Being  an  Account  of  the  Commerce  and  Trade  of  Monreal :  Of  the 
Arrival  of  the  Marquis  of  Denonville  with  fome  Troops ;  and 
of  the  recalling  of  Mr.  de  la  Barre.  With  a  curious  Defcription 
of  certain  Licenfes  for  trading  in  Beaver-Skins  in  the  remote 
Countries.  P*  5^* 

LETTER.    X. 

Dated  at  Boucherville  July  8.  1686. 

Relating  the  Arrival  of  Mr.  de  Champigni,  in  the  room  of  Mr. 
de  Meules,  who  is  recall'd  to  France ;  the  arrival  of  the 
Troops  that  came  along  with  him,  the  curiofity  of  the  Rackets, 
and  the  way  of  hunting  Elks;  with  a  Defcription  of  that 
Animal.  P-  55* 


i6  The  Contents. 

LETTER.    XI. 

Dated  at  Boucherville  May  28.  1687. 
Being  a  curious  Defcription  of  the  Hunting  of  divers  Animals,  p.  60. 

LETTER.    XII. 

Dated  at  St.  Helens  over  againft  Monreal  June  8.  1687. 

The  Chevalier  de  Vaudreuil  arrives  in  Canada  with  feme  Troops. 
Both  the  Regular  Troops  and  the  Militia  are  pofled  at  St. 
Helens,  in  a  readinefs  to  march  againfl  the  Iroquefe.      p.  68. 

LETTER.    XIII. 

Dated  at  Niagara  Aug.  2.  1687. 

Reprefenting  the  unfavourable  Iffue  of  the  Campaign^  made  in  the 
Iroquefe  Country ;  the  difcovery  of  an  Ambufcade,  and  the 
iffuing  of  Orders  for  the  Author  to  march  with  a  Detachment 
to  the  great  Lakes.  p.  70. 

LETTER.    XIV. 

Dated  at  Miffilimakinac  May  26.  1688. 

The  Author  leaves  Nagara,  and  has  an  Incounter  with  the  Iro- 
quefe at  the  end  of  the  Land-Carriage.  The  after-part  of  his 
Voyage.  A  Defcription  of  the  Country.  He  arrives  at  Fort  St. 
Jofeph  in  the  Mouth  of  the  Lake  of  Hurons.  A  Detachment 
of  the  Hurons  arrive  at  the  fame  place.  After  an  Ingagement, 
they  fet  out  for  MlfTilimakinac.  A  flrange  Adventure  of  Mr. 
de  la  Salle'j  Brother.     Miffilimakinac  defcrib'd.  p.  80. 


The  Contents.  17 

LETTER.    XV. 

Dated  at  Mijfdimakinac  Sept.  i8.  1688. 

Defcribing  the  Fall  calVd  Saut  St.  Marie,  where  the  Author  per- 

fwades  the  Inhabitants  to  joyn  r^^  Outaouas,  and  march  againft 

the  Iroquefe.    And  containing  an  account  of  the  Occurrences  of 

the  Voyage  between  that  Place  and  Miflilimakinac.  p.  92. 

LETTER.    XVL 

Dated  at  Miffilimakinac  May  28.  1689. 
Containing  an  Account  of  the  Author's  Departure  from^  and  Return 
to,  Miflilimaklnac.  //  Defcription  of  the  Bay  of  Puants,  and 
its  Villages.  An  ample  Defcription  of  the  Beavers,  followed  by 
the  Journal  of  a  remarkable  Voyage  upon  the  Long  River,  and 
a  Map  of  the  adjacent  Country.  p.  104. 

LETTER.    XVn. 

Dated  at  Quebec  Sep.  28.  1689. 
The  Author  fets  out  from  Miflilimakinac  to  the  Colony,  and  de- 
fcribes  the  Country,  Rivers,  and  Paffes  that  he  faw  by  the  way. 
The  Iroquefe  make  a  fatal  incur/ton  into  the  Ifland  of  Mon- 
real:  For;  Frontenac  is  abandon'd ;  Count  Frontenac  is  fent 
to  Canada,  and  the  Marquis  of  Denonville  is  recall'd.  p.  142. 

LETTER.    XVIII. 

Dated  at  Quebec  Nov.  15.  1689. 
Giving  an  Account  of  Mr.  de  Frontenac's  Arrival,  his  Reception, 
his  Voyage  to  Monreal,  and  the  repairing  of  Fort  Frontenac. 

p.  151. 


i8  The  Contents. 

LETTER.    XIX. 

Dated  at  Monreal  October  2.  1690. 

Relating  the  Attempts  upon  New-England  and  New- York;  a  fatal 

Embaffyfent  by  the  French  to  the  Iroquefe,  and  an  ill-concerted 

Enterprife  of  the  Englifh  and  the  Iroquefe,  in  marching  by 

Land  to  attack  the  French  Colony.  p.  155. 

LETTER.    XX. 

Dated  at  Rochel  January  12.  1691. 
Being  a  Relation  of  a  fecond  and  very  important  Expedition  of  the 
Englifh  by  Sea;  in  which  is  contained  a  Letter  written  by  the 
Engliih  Admiral  to  Count  Frontenac,  with  the  Governour's 
Verbal  Anfwer.  As  alfo  an  account  of  the  Author's  departure 
for  France.  p.  i59* 

LETTER.    XXI. 
Dated  at  Rochel  July  26.  1691. 
Containing  a  Defcription  of  the  Courts  or  Offices  of  the  Miniflers 
of  State,  and  a  view  of  fome  Services  that  are  ill  rewarded  at 
Court.  p.  166. 

LETTER.  XXII. 
Dated  at  Quebec  Nov.  10.  1691. 
JFhich  contains  an  account  of  the  Author's  departure  from  Rochel 
to  Quebec,  of  his  Voyage  to  the  mouth  of  the  River  St.  Laurence, 
of  a  Rencounter  with  an  Englifh  Ship  ivhich  he  fought ;  of  the 
flranding  of  his  Ship  ;  of  his  failing  thro'  the  River  St.  Laurence ; 
of  the  news  he  receiv'd  that  a  party  of  the  Englifh  and  Iro- 
quefe, had  defeated  a  Body  of  the  French  Troops.  p.  171. 


The  Contents.  19 

LETTER.    XXIII. 

Dated  at  Nants  O£lob.  25.  1692. 

Containing  an  Account  of  the  taking  of  fome  Englifh  Feffels^  of 
defeating  a  Party  of  the  Iroquefe,  of  an  Iroquefe  burnt  alive 
at  Quebec ;  of  another  Party  of  thefe  Barbarians,  who  having 
furpris'd  fome  Coureurs  de  Bois,  were  afterwards  furpris'd 
themfelves.  Of  the  Project  of  an  Enterprize  propos'd  by  Mr. 
Frontenac  to  the  Author.  Of  the  Author's  departure  in  a 
Frigat  for  France,  and  his  flopping  at  Placentia,  which  was 
then  attacked  by  the  Englifh  Fleet  that  came  to  take  that  Pofl 
from  us.  How  the  Englifh  fail'd  in  their  Defign,  and  the 
Author  purfu'd  his  Voyage.  p.  175, 

LETTER.    XXIV. 

Dated  at  Nants  May  10.  1693. 

Containing  an  Account  of  Mr.  Frontenac'i  Proje£l,  which  was 
reje5led  at  Court,  and  the  reafon  why  it  was  rejected.  The 
King  gives  the  Author  the  Lieutenancy  of  Newfound  Land, 
&c.  together  with  the  Independent  Company.  p.  187. 

LETTER.    XXV. 

Dated  at  Fiana  in  Portugal  Jan.  31.  1694. 

The  Author's  departure  from  France  to  Placentia.  A  Fleet  of 
30  Englifh  Ships  came  to  feize  upon  that  place;  but  is  dif- 
appointcd,  and  Sheers  off.  The  reafon  why  the  Englifli  have 
bad  fuccefs  in  all  their  Enterprifes  beyond  Sea.  The  Author's 
Adventure  with  the  Governour  of  Placentia.  His  departure  for 
Portugal.   An  Engagement  with  a  Flufhing  Privateer,    p.  193. 


20  The  Contents. 


Memoirs  of  North- America, 

Containing  a  Geographical  Defcription  of  that  vaft  Continent;  the 

Cuftoms  and  Commerce  of  the  Inhabitants^  &c.  p.  203. 

A  ftiort  Defcription  of  Canada.  p.  205. 

A  Lift  of  the  Savage  Nations  of  Canada.  p.  230. 

A  Lift  of  the  Animals  of  Canada.  p.  232. 

A  Defcription  of  fuch  Animals  orBeafls  as  are  not  mentioned 

in  the  Letters.  p.  233. 

A  Lift  of  the  Fowl  or  Birds  of  Canada.  p.  237. 

A  Defcription  of  fuch  Birds  as  are  not  accounted  for  in  the 

Letters.  p.  239. 

A  Defcription  of  the  Infe5ls  of  Canada.  p.  242. 

The  Names  of  the  Fifh  of  Canada.  p.  243. 

A  Defcription  of  the  Fifh  that  are  not  mention' d  in  the  Letters  p.  244. 
The  Trees  and  Fruits  of  Canada.  p.  247. 

A  Defcription  of  the  above-mention' d  Trees.  p.  248. 

A  General  view  of  the  Commerce  of  Canada>  p.  254. 

The  Commodities  truck'd  to  and  again  between  the  French 

and  the  Savages.  p.  257. 

An  Account  of  the  Government  of  Canada  in  General.  p.  260. 

A  Difcourfe  of  the  Intereft  of  the  French  and  Englifh  in 

North-America.  p.  260. 

A  Table  Explaining  fome  uncommon  Terms.  p.  276. 


The  Contents.  21 


The  Contents  of  the  Second 
Volume. 

ADifcourfe  of  the  Habit,  Houfes,  Complexion  and  Temperament 
of  the  Savages  0/ North-America.  P.  i.  Vol.  2 

J  fhort  view  of  the  Humours  and  Ciiftoms  of  the  Savages.  p.  7 
The  Belief  of  the  Savages,  and  the  Obflacles  of  their  Converfion.  p.  19 
The  way  of  PTorfhip  us'd  by  the  Savages.  p.  29 

Jn  Account  of  the  Amours  and  Marriages  of  the  Savages.  p.  34 
A  View  of  the  Difeafes  and  Remedies  of  the  Savages.  p.  45 

The  Diver/ions  of  Hunting  and  Shooting  ufual  among  the 

Savages.  P-5S 

The  Military  Art  of  the  Savages.  p.  7^ 

A  View  of  the  Heraldy  and  the  Coats  of  Arms  of  the  Savages,  p.  84 
An  Explication  of  the  Savage  Hieroglyphicks.  p.  86 


A  Conference  or  Dialogue  between  the  Author  and 
Adario,  a  noted  Man  among  the  Savages. 

Containing  a  Circumfiantial  view  of  the  Cufloms  and  Humours  of 
that  People.  P-  90- 


22  The  Contents. 


An  APPENDIX^  Containing  fome  New  Voyages 
to  Portugal  and  Denmark;  after  the  Author's  Retire- 
ment from  Canada. 

LETTER.    I. 

Dated  at  Lisbon  April  20.  1694. 

Containing  a  Defcription  0/ Viana,  Porto  a  Porto,  Avelro,  Colm- 
bra,  Lisbon  ;  together  with  a  View  of  the  Court  of  Portugal; 
and  an  Account  of  the  Government^  Laws^  Cufioms,  and  Hu- 
mours of  the  Portuguefe.  p.  185. 

LETTER    II. 

Dated  at  Travemunde  1694. 

Containing  an  Account  of  the  Author's  Voyage  from  Lisbon  to 
Garnfey ;  his  Adventure  with  an  Englifh  Man  of  fVar^  and 
an  Englifli  Privateer :  A  Defcription  of  Rotterdam  and  Am- 
flerdam  ;  the  Author's  Voyage  to  Hamburgh ;  the  Dimenfions 
of  a  Flemifh  Sloop ;  a  Defcription  of  the  City  of  Hamburg; 
the  Author's  Journey  from  thence  to  Lubeck,  and  a  Defcription 
of  that  City.  p.  211. 

LETTER.    III. 

Dated  at  Copenhagen  Sept.  12.  1694. 

Containing  a  Defcription  of  the  Port  and  City  of  Copenhagen,  a 
view  of  the  Danifh  Courts  and  of  the  Humours^  Cufioms^  Com- 
merce, Forces,  &c.  of  the  Danes.  p.  226. 


The  Contents.  23 

LETTER.    IV. 
Dated  at  Paris  Decemb.  29.  1694. 

Containing  a  Journal  of  the  Author's  Travels  from  Copenhagen 
to  Paris.  p.  244. 

LETTER.    V. 
Dated  at  Erleich  July  4.  1694. 

Giving  a  viezv  of  the  SttperJUtion  and  Ignorance  of  the  People  of 
Beam ;  their  addi^lednefs  to  the  notions  of  Witchcraft,  Appari- 
tions, &c.  And  the  Author's  Arguments  againft  that  Delufion. 

p.  255. 

LETTER.    VI. 

Dated  at  Huefia  July  11.  1695. 

Containing  an  Account  of  the  Author's  efcape  and  journey  to  Spain ; 
his  being  taken  up  for  a  Huguenot,  and  the  Ignorance  and 
Bigotry  of  the  Curates  and  People  of  Beam  in  France,   p.  268. 

LETTER.    VII. 

Dated  at  Saragoza  Octob.  8.  1695. 

Containing  a  Defcription  of  Saragoza  ;  a  View  of  the  Government 
0/ Arragon,  and  an  Account  of  the  Cufloms  of  the  People,  p.  274. 

A  fhort  Dictionary  of  the  Language  of  the  Savages.  p.  287. 


Some  New 

VOYAGES 

TO 

North-America. 

TOME   I. 


LETTER    I. 

Dated  at  the  Port  of  Quebec,  Nov.  8.  1683. 
Containing  a  Defcription  of  the  Paffage  from  France  to  Canada; 
with  fome  Remarks  upon  the  Coajis,  Channels,  &c.  and  the 
Variation  of  the  Needle. 

SIR, 

I  AM  furpris'd  to  find  that  a  Voyage  to  the  New  World  is 
fo  formidable  to  thofe  who  are  oblig'd  to  undertake  it; 
for  I  folemnly  proteft  that  'tis  far  from  being  what  the  World 
commonly  takes  it  for.  'Tis  true,  the  Paffage  is  in  fome  mea- 
fure  long  ;  but  then  the  hopes  of  viewing  an  unknown  Country, 
attones  for  the  tedioufnefs  of  the  Voyage.  When  we  broke 
ground  from  Rochel,  I  acquainted  you  with  the  Reafons  that 
mov'd  Mr.  le  Fevre  de  la  Barre,  Governor  General  of  Canada, 


26  Some  New  Voyages 

to  fend  the  Sieur  Mahu,  a  Canadefe^  to  France'^',  and  at  the 
fame  time  gave  you  to  know,  that  he  [2]  had  refolv'd  upon  the 
utter  deftrudllon  of  the  Iroquefe,  who  are  a  very  Warlike  and 
Savage  People.^  Thefe  Barbarians  befriend  the  Eitgli/h,  upon 
the  account  of  the  Succours  they  receive  from  'em ;  but  they 
are  enemies  to  us,  upon  the  apprehenfion  of  being  deftroy'd 
by  us  fome  time  or  other.  The  General  I  fpoke  of  but  now, 
expeded  that  the  King  would  fend  him  feven  or  eight  hundred 
Men ;  but  when  we  fet  out  from  Rochel  the  feafon  was  fo  far 
advanc'd,  that  our  three  Companies  of  Marines  were  reckon'd 
a  fufficient  Venture. 


1  Le  Febre  de  la  Barre  was  in  1682  appointed  governor  of  New  France,  to  super- 
sede Frontenac.  He  was  an  officer  of  experience,  having  seen  service  in  the  West 
Indies,  been  governor  of  Cayenne  (1664-66),  and  defeated  an  English  fleet  and 
recovered  Antigua,  Montserrat,  and  Nevis  for  the  French.  In  early  life  he  had  been 
a  lawyer  and  government  official  in  France.  Upon  his  arrival  in  the  colony  (1682), 
he  determined  upon  war  with  the  Iroquois,  and  dispatched  to  the  king  urgent  requests 
for  regular  troops,  of  whom  the  colony  was  bereft.  In  the  spring  of  1683,  the  Iro- 
quois again  harassed  the  colony,  and  the  governor  impressed  a  small  vessel  lying  at 
Quebec  to  send  news  thereof  to  France.  This  would  appear  to  have  been  the  ship  of 
one  Jean  Paul  Meheu,  seigneur  of  a  fief  of  La  Riviere  Maheu.  Some  years  previous, 
a  Canadian  of  the  same  name  is  noted  as  bearing  letters  to  France.  —  Thv.aites, 
Jesuit  Relations  (Cleveland,  1896-1901),  xlvi,  p.  179.  When  this  urgent  request 
reached  the  court,  the  king  determined  to  at  once  send  to  New  France  three  companies 
of  soldiers.  See  Collection  de  Manuscrits  relatifs  a  la  Nowvelle  France  (Quebec, 
1883),  i,  p.  310.  The  transport  was  named  the  "Tempest,"  commanded  by  Sieur 
Pingo.  It  departed  from  La  Rochelle  Aug.  29,  1683  ;  among  the  officers  was  Lahon- 
tan,  this  being  his  first  venture  across  seas.  —  Ed. 

2  The  Iroquois  had  long  been  the  scourge  of  Canada  ;  taking  advantage  of  their 
strategic  position  between  the  English  and  Dutch  of  New  York  and  the  French  of  the 
St.  Lawrence,  they  were  attempting  to  control  the  fur-trade  of  the  interior  in  the 
interest  of  the  English,  bringing  disaster  upon  the  colony  of  New  France.  They 
made  war  upon  the  Indian  allies  of  the  French  on  the  Upper  Lakes,  and  had  recently 
(1680-82)  inflicted  a  heavy  blow  upon  the  Illinois,  among  whom  La  Salle  was  endeav- 
oring to  found  a  colony.  —  Ed. 


to  North' Kv[\tnc2i,  27 

I  met  with  nothing  in  our  Paflfage  that  was  difagreeable, 
abating  for  a  Storm  that  alarm'd  us  for  fome  days,  upon  the 
precipice  of  the  bank  of  Newfound-Land^  where  the  Waves 
fwell  prodigioufly,  even  when  the  Winds  are  low.  In  that 
Storm  our  Frigat  receiv'd  fome  rude  fhocks  from  the  Sea ; 
but  in  regard  that  fuch  accidents  are  ufual  in  that  Voyage, 
they  made  no  impreffion  upon  the  old  feafon'd  Sailors.  As 
for  my  part,  I  could  not  pretend  to  that  pitch  of  indifference ; 
for  having  never  made  fuch  a  Voyage  before,  I  was  fo  alarm'd 
in  feeing  the  Waves  mount  up  to  the  Clouds,  that  I  made  more 
vows  to  Neptune^  than  the  brave  Idomenaus  did  in  his  return 
from  the  Wars  of  Troy.  After  we  made  the  bank,  the  Waves 
funk,  and  the  Wind  dwindled,  and  the  Sea  became  fo  fmooth 
and  eafie,  that  we  could  not  work  our  Ship.  You  can  fcarce 
imagine  what  quantities  of  Cod-fifh  were  catch'd  there  by  our 
Seamen,  in  the  fpace  of  a  quarter  of  an  hour;  for  though  we 
had  thirty  two  fathom  Water,  yet  the  Hook  was  no  fooner  at 
the  bottom,  than  the  Fifh  was  catch'd  ;  fo  that  they  had  noth- 
ing to  do  but  to  throw  in,  and  take  up  without  interruption : 
But  after  all,  fuch  is  the  misfortune  of  this  Fifhery,  that  it  do's 
not  fucceed  but  upon  certain  banks,  which  are  commonly  paft 
over  without  flopping.  However,  as  we  were  plentifully  [3] 
entertain'd  at  the  coft  of  thefe  Fifhes,  fo  fuch  of  'em  as  con- 
tinued in  the  Sea,  made  fufficient  reprifals  upon  the  Corps  of 
a  Captain,  and  of  feveral  Soldiers,  who  dy'd  of  the  Scurvy, 
ajid  were  thrown  over-board  three  or  four  days  after. 

In  the  mean  time  the  Wind  veering  to  the  Weft-North- 
Weft,  we  were  oblig'd  to  lye  bye  for  five  or  fix  days  ;  but  after 


28  Some  New  Voyages 

that  it  chop'd  to  the  North,  and  fo  we  happily  made  Cape 
Raje^  tho'  indeed  our  Pilots  were  at  a  lofs  to  know  where  we 
were,  by  reafon  that  they  could  not  take  the  Latitude  for  ten 
or  twelve  days  before.^  You  may  eafily  imagine,  that  'was 
with  great  joy  that  we  heard  one  of  our  Sailors  call  from  the 
Top-Maft,  Land,  Land,  juft  as  St.  Paul  did  when  he  approach'd 
to  Maltha,  VTjv  6pC>,  yijv  6pC):  For  you  muft  know  that  when 
the  Pilots  reckon  they  approach  to  Land,  they  ufe  the  pre- 
caution of  fending  up  Sailors  to  the  Top-Maft,  in  order  to 
fome  difcovery ;  and  thefe  Sailors  are  reliev'd  every  two  hours 
till  Night  comes,  at  which  time  they  furl  their  Sails  if  the  Land 
is  not  yet  defcry'd :  So  that  in  the  Night-time  they  fcarce 
make  any  way.  From  this  it  appears  how  important  it  is 
to  know  the  Coaft,  before  you  approach  to  it ;  nay,  the  Paf- 
fengers  put  fuch  a  value  upon  the  difcovery,  that  they  prefent 
the  firft  difcoverer  with  fome  Piftoles.  In  the  mean  time, 
you'll  be  pleas'd  to  obferve,  that  the  Needle  of  the  Compafs, 
which  naturally  points  to  the  North,  turns  upon  the  bank  of 
Newfound-Land,  twenty  three  Degrees  towards  the  North- 
Weft;  that  is,  it  points  there  a  degree  nearer  to  the  Weft, 
than  North-North- Weft.  This  remark  we  made  by  our  Com- 
pafs of  Variation. 

We  defcry'd  the  Cape  about  Noon ;  and  in  order  to  con- 
firm the  Difcovery,  ftood  in  upon  it  with  all  fails  aloft.     At 


1  The  name  Race,  applied  to  the  southeastern  extremity  of  Newfoundland,  is 
first  met  under  the  form  "  Cap  Rogo,"  on  a  map  of  about  the  year  1500.  The  name 
seems  to  have  been  given  from  the  French  word  "  ras,"  bare  or  flat.  See  Harrisse, 
Decowverte  et  Evolution  cartographique  de  Terre-Newve  (Paris,  1900) ,  p.  43.  —  Ed. 


to  iVor^i-America.  29 

laft,  being  affur'd  that  'twas  the  Promontory  we  look'd  for, 
an  univerfal  joy  was  [4]  fpread  throughout  the  Ship,  and  the 
fate  of  the  wretches  that  we  had  thrown  over-board,  was  quite 
forgot.  Then  the  Sailors  fet  about  the  Chriftening  of  thofe 
who  had  never  made  the  Voyage  before,  and  indeed  they  had 
done  it  fooner,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  death  of  our  above- 
mention'd  Companions.  The  Chriftening  I  fpeak  of,  is  an 
impertinent  Ceremony,  pradis'd  by  Sea-faring  Men,  whofe 
humours  are  as  ftrange  and  extravagant,  as  the  Element  it  felf, 
upon  which  they  foolifhly  truft  themfelves.  By  vertue  of  a 
Cuftom  of  old  ftanding,  they  profane  the  Sacrament  of  Bap- 
tifm  in  an  unaccountable  manner.  Upon  that  occafion,  the 
old  Sailors  being  blacken'd  all  over,  and  difguis'd  with  Rags 
and  Ropes,  force  the  greener  fort  that  have  never  pafs'd  fome 
certain  degrees  of  Latitude  before,  to  fall  down  on  their 
Knees,  and  to  fwear  upon  a  Book  of  Sea  Charts,  that  upon 
all  occafions  they  will  pradtife  upon  others,  the  fame  Cere- 
mony that  is  then  made  ufe  of  towards  them.  After  the  admin- 
iftring  of  this  ridiculous  Oath,  they  throw  fifty  Buckets  full  of 
Water  upon  their  Head,  Belly,  and  Thighs,  and  indeed  all 
over  their  Body,  without  any  regard  to  times  or  feafons. 
This  piece  of  folly  is  chiefly  pradlis'd  under  the  ^Equator, 
under  the  Tropicks,  under  the  Polar  Circles,  upon  the  bank 
of  Newfound-Land;  and  in  the  Streights  of  Gibraltar^  the 
Sund^  and  the  Dardanelloes.  As  for  Perfons  of  Note  or  Char- 
acter, they  are  exempted  from  the  Ceremony,  at  the  expence 
of  five  or  fix  bottles  of  Brandy  for  the  Ships  Crew. 


30  Some  New  Voyages 

Three  or  four  days  after  the  performance  of  this  Solem- 
nity, v/e  difcover'd  Cape  Raye}  and  fo  made  up  to  St.  Laurence 
Bay,  in  the  Mouth  of  which  we  were  becalm'd  for  a  little 
while ;  and  during  that  Calm,  we  had  a  clearer  and  pleafanter 
day,  than  any  we  had  feerl  in  the  Paffage.  It  look'd  as  if  that 
day  had  been  vouchfaf'd  us  by  way  of  recompence  [5]  for  the 
Rains,  Foggs,  and  high  Winds,  that  we  incounter'd  by  the 
way.  There  we  faw  an  Engagement  between  a  Whale  and  a 
*  Efpadon,  a  Fijh  between  *  Sword-Fifh,  at  the  diftance  of  a  Gun- 
10  and  15  Foot  long,  be-  ihot  from  our  Frigat.  We  were  per- 
iv.g  four  Foot  in  circum-  fedtly  charm'd  when  we  faw  the  Sword- 
ference,  and  having  in  its      pj^  j^^p   ^^^  ^f  ^^^  ^^^^^  -^^  ^^der 

Snout  a  fort  of  Saw  which  ,        .      o  •  1      -n     1       /•    1 

.  ,  r,  ,  ;  J  J  to  dart  Its  Spear  mto  the  Body  of  the 
IS  four  Foot  long,  four  In-  ^  •' 

ches  broad,  and  fix  Lines  Whale,  when  oblig'd  to  take  breath. 
thick.  This  entertaining  fhow  lafted  at  leaft 

two  hours,  fometimes  to  the  Starboard,  and  fometimes  to 
the  Larboard  of  the  Ship.  The  Sailors,  among  whom  Super- 
ftition  prevails  as  much  as  among  the  Egyptians,  took  this  for 
a  prefage  of  fome  mighty  Storm ;  but  the  Prophecy  ended 
in  two  or  three  days  of  contrary  Winds,  during  which  time 
we  travers'd  between  the  Ifland  of  Nezv found-Land,  and  that 
of  Cape  Breton.  Two  days  after  we  came  in  fight  of  the 
Ifland  of  Fowls,  by  the  help  of  a  North-Eaft  Wind ;  which 
drove  us  from  the  Mouth  of  St.  Laurence  Bay,  to  the  Ifle  of 
Anticofti,  upon  the  bank  of  which,  we  thought  to  have  been  cafl 


1  Cape  Ray  is  at  the  southwestern  extremity  of  Newfoundland  ;  the  name  first 
appeared  on  a  map  of  1600.     Harrisse,  op.  cit.,  p.  285.  —  Ed. 


to  North'h.vnmcdL,  31 

away,  by  nearing  it  too  much.  In  the  Mouth  of  that  River 
we  fell  Into  a  fecond  calm,  which  was  follow'd  by  a  contrary 
Wind,  that  oblig'd  us  to  lye  bye  for  fome  days.  At  laft  we 
made  Tadoiijfac^  by  gradual  approaches,  and  there  came  to  an 
Anchor.^ 

This  River  is  four  Leagues  broad  where  we  then  rode,  and 
twenty  two  at  its  Mouth ;  but  it  contracts  it  felf  gradually,  as 
it  approaches  to  its  fource.  Two  days  after,  the  Wind  ftand- 
ing  Eaft,  we  weigh'd  Anchor ;  and  being  favor'd  by  the  Tyde, 
got  fafe  through  the  Channel  of  the  Red  Ifland,  in  which  the 
Currents  are  apt  to  turn  a  Veffel  on  one  fide,  as  well  as  at  the 
Ifland  of  Coudres,  which  lies  fome  Leagues  higher.^  But  upon 
the  Coafl:  of  the  laft  [6]  Ifland,  we  had  certainly  ftruck  upon 
the  Rocks,  if  we  had  not  drop'd  an  Anchor.  Had  the  Ship 
been  caft  away  at  that  place,  we  might  eafily  have  fav'd  our 


1  The  Island  of  Fowls  is  probably  the  group  still  known  as  Bird  Rocks,  in  St, 
Lawrence  Gulf,  north  of  Magdalen  Islands. 

Anticosti  is  a  large  island  one  hundred  and  forty  miles  long  by  about  twenty- 
seven  in  average  breadth.  It  lies  in  the  mouth  of  St.  Lawrence  River,  and  three  years 
before  this  voyage  of  Lahontan  had  been  granted  as  a  seigniory  of  Louis  Jolliet,  the 
Mississippi  explorer. 

Tadoussac,  at  the  entrance  of  Saguenay  River,  is  one  of  the  oldest  towns  in 
Canada,  having  been  founded  before  Quebec.  It  was  the  favorite  resort  of  the  Mon- 
tagnais  Indians,  and  the  centre  of  a  thriving  fur-trade  and  fishery.  The  Recollects 
said  mass  here  as  early  as  1617  ;  and  here  the  hostile  English  fleet,  under  Admiral 
Sir  David  Kirk,  anchored  in  July,  1628.  The  Jesuits  began  a  mission  at  Tadoussac 
before  1642,  and  one  of  their  early  churches  (built  1647-50)  is  still  to  be  seen. —  Ed. 

2  Red  Island  is  that  now  known  as  Isle  Rouge,  in  the  St.  Lawrence  opposite 
Tadoussac.    It  was  early  noted  for  its  seal  fishing.    See  Jesuit  Relations,  xxxii,  p.  93. 

Isle  aux  Coudres  was  so  designated  for  the  hazelnut  bushes  with  which  it  abounded, 
and  appears  to  have  been  so  named  by  Cartier.  The  early  voyagers  speak  of  the 
number  of  elk  to  be  found  on  this  island.  —  Ed. 


32  Some  New  Voyages 

felves :  But  it  prov'd  fo,  that  we  were  more  aflfraid  than  hurt. 
Next  Morning  we  weighed  with  a  frefh  gale  from  the  Eaft,  and 
the  next  day  after  came  to  an  Anchor  over  againft  Cape  Tour- 
mente,  where  we  had  not  above  two  Leagues  over,  tho'  at  the 
fame  time  'tis  a  dangerous  place  to  thofe  who  are  unacquainted 
with  the  Channel.^  From  thence  we  had  but  feven  Leagues 
failing  to  the  Port  of  Quebec,  where  we  now  ride  at  Anchor. 
In  our  Paffage  from  the  red  Ifland  to  this  place,  we  faw  fuch 
floats  of  Ice,  and  fo  much  Snow  upon  the  Land,  that  we  were 
upon  the  point  of  turning  back  for  France,  tho'  we  were  not 
then  above  thirty  Leagues  off  our  defired  Port.  We  were 
affraid  of  being  ftop'd  by  the  Ice,  and  fo  loft ;  but  thank  God 
we  'fcap'd. 

We  have  receiv'd  advice,  that  the  Governor  has  mark'd 
out  Quarters  for  our  Troops  in  fome  Villages  or  Cantons 
adjacent  to  this  City;  fo  that  I  am  oblig'd  to  prepare  to  go 
afhore,  and  therefore  muft  make  an  end  of  this  Letter.  I 
cannot  as  yet  give  you  any  account  of  the  Country,  excepting 
that  'tis  already  mortally  cold.  As  to  the  River,  I  mean  to 
give  you  a  more  ample  defcription  of  it,  when  I  come  to  know 
it  better.  We  are  informed  that  Mr.  de  la  Salle  is  juft  return' d 
from  his  Travels,  which  he  undertook  upon  the  difcovery  of 
a  great  River  that  falls  into  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  ;  and  that  he 


1  Cape  Tourmente  is  a  lofty  promontory  on  the  St.  Lawrence,  about  twenty  miles 
below  Quebec,  towering  nineteen  hundred  feet  above  the  meadows  (Beaupre)  at  its 
base.  It  was  so  named  by  Champlain  (1608),  who  noted  that  "  however  little  wind 
may  blow  the  sea  there  is  as  if  it  were  high  tide.  At  this  place  the  water  begins  to 
be  fresh.  "  —  Ed. 


to  North- hxntnc2i.  33 

imbarques  to  morrow  for  France}  He  is  perfedlly  well  ac- 
quainted with  Canada^  and  for  that  reafon  you  ought  to  vifit 
him,  if  you  go  to  Paris  this  Winter.     I  am, 

SIR, 

Tours,  &c. 


1  Rene  Robert  Cavelier,  Sieur  de  la  Salle,  had  just  returned  from  his  successful 
journey  into  the  interior,  where  he  had  explored  the  Mississippi  and  in  Illinois 
founded  the  colony  of  St.  Louis.  Frontenac,  his  patron,  had  been  replaced,  and  the 
new  governor  gave  a  ready  ear  to  La  Salle's  detractors.  The  fortunes  of  the  explorer 
were  desperate,  and  he  was  about  to  embark  for  France  to  seek  redress  at  court. 
This  was  his  farewell  to  Canada,  his  final  voyage  being  made  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico, 
upon  whose  waters  he  was  assassinated  (March  i8,  1687). —  Ed. 


34  Some  New  Voyages 


LETTER    II. 

Dated  at  the  Canton  of  Beaupr^,^  May  2.  1684. 
Containing  a  Defcription  of  the  Plantations  of  Canada,  and  the 
manner  in  which  they  were  firfl  form' d :    As  alfo  an  account  of 
the  Tranfportation  of  JVhores  from  France  to  that  Country ; 
together  with  a  view  of  its  Climate  and  Soil. 

SIR, 

AS  foon  as  we  landed  laft  year,  Mr.  de  la  Barre  lodg'd  our 
three  Companies  in  fome  Cantons  or  Quarters  in  the 
Neighbourhood  of  Quebec.  The  Planters  call  thefe  places  Cotes^ 
which  in  France  iignifies  no  more  than  the  Sea-Coaft ;  tho'  in  this 
Country  where  the  names  of  Town  and  Village  are  unknown, 
that  word  is  made  ufe  of  to  exprefs  a  Seignory  or  Manour, 
the  Houfes  of  which  lie  at  the  diftance  of  two  or  three  hun- 
dred Paces  one  from  another,  and  are  feated  on  the  brink  of 
the  River  of  St.  Laurence.-    In  earneft.  Sir,  the  Boors  of  thofe 


iThe  three  companies  were  quartered  at  villages  in  the  vicinity  of  Quebec.  It 
fell  to  Lahontan's  lot  to  pass  the  winter  in  the  seigniory  of  Beaupre,  which  stretched 
for  six  leagues  along  the  river  and  embraced  more  than  the  present  county  of  Mont- 
morency. Beaupre  was  early  settled,  and  as  a  Jesuit  seigniory  received  much  atten- 
tion. At  this  time  it  was  considered  the  most  orderly  and  thrift)'  settlement  in  the 
colony.  —  Ed. 

2  Feudalism  was  established  in  New  France  by  the  act  of  Richelieu,  in  his  grant 
to  the  Company  of  One  Hundred  Associates  (1627) .  Seigniorial  tenure  was  not  abol- 
ished in  Lower  Canada  (Province  of  Quebec)  until  1854.  On  the  influence  of  this 
system  see  Parkman,  Old  Regime  in  Canada  (Boston,  1874),  chap,  xv ;  Weir, 
Administration  of  the  Old  Regime  in  Canada  (Montreal,  1896-97). —  Ed. 


to  A^or^/6- America.  35 

Manors  live  with  more  eafe  and  conveniency,  than  an  infinity 

of  the  Gentlemen  in  France.     I  am  out  indeed  in  calling  'em 

Boors,  for  that  name  is  as  little  known  here  as  in  Spain; 

whether  it  be  that  they  pay  no  Taxes,  and  injoy  the  liberty  of 

Hunting  and  Fiihing;  or  that  the  eafinefs  of  their  Life,  puts 

'em  upon  a  level  with  the  Nobility.    The 

--,  ,  .  ,    .  .     J  An  Arpent  is  a  fpot 

pooreft  of  them  have  four  Urpents  of    .f^,,^^^ containing  100 

Ground  in  front,  and  thirty  or  forty  in     Perches  fquare,  each  of 

depth :  The  whole  Country  being  a  con-     which  is  eighteen  Foot 

tinued  Forreft  of  lofty  Trees,  the  ftumps     '°"^" 

[8]  of  which  muft  be  grub'd  up,  before  they  can  make  ufe  of 

a  Plough.    'Tis  true,  this  is  a  troublefom  and  chargeable  task 

at  firft ;  but  in  a  fhort  time  after  they  make  up  their  Loffes ; 

for  when  the  Virgin  ground  is  capable  of  receiving  Seed,  it 

yields  an  increafe  to  the  rate  of  an  hundred  fold.     Corn  is 

there  fown  in  May,  and  reap'd  about  the  middle  of  September. 

Inftead  of  threfhing  the  Sheafs  in  the  Field,  they  convey  'em 

to  Barns,  where  they  lie  till  the  coldeft  feafon  of  the  Winter, 

at  which  time  the  Grain  is  more  eafily  difengag'd  from  the 

Ear.    In  this  Country  they  likewife  fow  Peafe,  which  are  much 

efteem'd  in  France.    All  forts  of  Grain  are  very  cheap  here,  as 

well  as  Butchers  Meat  and  Fowl.     The  price  of  Wood  is 

almoft  nothing,  in  comparifon  with  the  charge  of  its  carriage, 

which  after  all  is  very  inconfiderable. 

Moft  of  the  Inhabitants  are  a  free  fort  of  People  that 

remov'd  hither  from  France,  and  brought  with  'em  but  little 

Money  to  fet  up  withal :    The  reft  are  thofe  who  were  Soldiers 

about  thirty  or  forty  years  ago,  at  which  time  the  Regiment 


36  Some  New  Voyages 

of  Carigtian  was  broke,  and  they  exchang'd  a  Military  Poft, 
for  the  Trade  of  Agriculture}  Neither  the  one  nor  the  other 
pay'd  any  thing  for  the  grounds  they  poffefs,  no  more  than 
the  Officers  of  thefe  Troops,  who  mark'd  out  to  themfelves, 
certain  portions  of  unmanur'd  and  woody  Lands;  for  this 
vaft  Continent  is  nothing  elfe  than  one  continued  Forreft. 
The  Governours  General  allow'd  the  Officers  three  or  four 
Leagues  of  ground  in  front,  with  as  much  depth  as  they 
pleas'd ;  and  at  the  fame  time  the  Officers  gave  the  Soldiers 
as  much  ground  as  they  pleas'd,  upon  the  condition  of  the 
payment  of  a  Crown  per  Jrpent,  by  way  of  Fief. 

After  the  reform  of  thefe  Troops,  feveral  Ships  were  fent 
hither  from  France,  with  a  Cargoe  of  Women  of  an  ordinary 
Reputation,  under  the  diredlion  [9]  of  fome  old  ftale  Nuns, 
who  rang'd  'em  in  three  Claffes.  The  Veftal  Virgins  were 
heap'd  up,  (if  I  may  fo  fpeak)  one  above  another,  in  three 
different  Apartments,  where  the  Bridegrooms  fingled  out  their 
Brides,  juft  as  a  Butcher  do's  an  Ewe  from  amongft  a  Flock  of 
Sheep.  In  thefe  three  Seraglio's,  there  was  fuch  variety  and 
change  of  Diet,  as  could  fatisfie  the  moft  whimfical  Appetites; 
for  here  was  fome  big  fome  little,  fome  fair  fome  brown,  fome 
fat  and  fome  meagre.    In  fine,  there  was  fuch  Accommodation, 

^  Lahontan's  chronology  is  quite  inaccurate  ;  scarcely  twenty  years  had  passed 
since  the  regiment  of  Carignan-Salieres,  the  first  regular  troops  in  New  France,  was 
ordered  to  America.  This  command  had  seen  service  in  France  and  against  the 
Turks.  Coming  to  Canada  in  1665,  the  soldiers  were  effectively  employed  against 
the  Iroquois.  A  few  years  later  several  companies  were  disbanded,  and  urged  to 
become  colonists.  Rewards  in  money  and  land  were  given  those  who  married  and 
settled  in  the  province,  and  the  descendants  of  these  soldiers  were  among  the  most  able 
and  prominent  citizens  of  the  colony.  See  Suite,  "  Le  Regiment  deCarignan,"  in 
Canadian  Royal  Society  Proceedings,  2d  series,  viii,  pp.  25-95.  —  Ed. 


to  iVo;Y/6-America.  37 

that  every  one  might  be  fitted  to  his  Mind  :  And  indeed  the 
Market  had  fuch  a  run,  that  in  fifteen  days  time,  they  were  all 
difpos'd  of.  I  am  told,  that  the  fatteft  went  off  befl,  upon 
the  apprehenfion  that  thefe  being  lefs  adive,  would  keep  truer 
to  their  Ingagements,  and  hold  out  better  againft  the  nipping 
cold  of  the  Winter :  But  after  all,  a  great  many  of  the  He- 
Adventurers  found  themfelves  miftaken  in  their  meafures. 
However,  let  that  be  as  it  will,  it  affords  a  very  curious 
Remark ;  namely.  That  in  fome  parts  of  the  World,  to  which 
the  vicious  European  Women  are  tranfported,  the  Mob  of  thofe 
Countries  do's  ferioufly  believe,  that  their  Sins  are  fo  defac'd 
by  the  ridiculous  Chriflening,  I  took  notice  of  before,  that 
they  are  look'd  upon  ever  after  as  Ladies  of  Vertue,  of  Honour, 
and  of  an  untarnifh'd  condud  of  Life.  The  Sparks  that  wanted 
to  be  married,  made  their  Addreffes  to  the  above-mention'd 
Governefl'es,  to  whom  they  were  oblig'd  to  give  an  account  of 
their  Goods  and  Eftates,  before  they  were  allow'd  to  make 
their  choice  in  the  three  Seraglio's.  After  the  choice  was  deter- 
min'd,  the  Marriage  was  concluded  upon  the  fpot,  in  the 
prefence  of  a  Priefl,  and  a  publick  Notary ;  and  the  next  day 
the  Governor-General  beftow'd  upon  the  married  Couple,  a 
Bull,  a  Cow,  a  Hog,  a  Sow,  a  Cock,  a  Hen,  two  Barrels  of 
fait  Meat,  and  eleven  Crowns ;  together  with  [lo]  a 
certain  Coat  of  Arms  call'd  by  the  Greeks  \\  Kipara} 


1  This  slanderous  and  apparently  malicious  account  of  the  mothers  of  the  Cana- 
dian population  has  brought  much  obloquy  upon  our  author.  For  a  refutation  from 
contemporary  documents,  see  Parkman,  Old  Regime,  pp.  221-230  ;  Roy,  "  Le  Baron 
deLahontan,"  Can.  Roy.  Soc.Proc,  1894,  sec.  i,pp.  150-162;  Suite,  "  Pretendues 
Origines  des  Canadiens  fran(ais,"  in  Id.,  1885,  sec.  i,  pp.  13-26.  —  Ed. 


38  Some  New  Voyages 

The  Officers  having  a  nicer  tafte  than  the  Soldiers,  made  their 
AppHcation  to  the  Daughters  of  the  ancient  Gentlemen  of  the 
Country,  or  thofe  of  the  richer  fort  of  Inhabitants ;  for  you 
know  that  Canada  has  been  poffefs'd  by  the  French  above  an 
hundred  years. 

In  this  Country  every  one  lives  in  a  good  and  a  well  fur- 
nifh'd  Houfe ;  and  moft  of  the  Houfes  are  of  Wood,  and  two 
Stories  high.  Their  Chimnies  are  very  large,  by  reafon  of 
the  prodigious  Fires  they  make  to  guard  themfelves  from  the 
Cold,  which  is  there  beyond  all  meafure,  from  the  Month  of 
December^  to  that  of  April.  During  that  fpace  of  time,  the 
River  is  always  frozen  over,  notwithftanding  the  flowing  and 
ebbing  of  the  Sea ;  and  the  Snow  upon  the  ground,  is  three 
or  four  foot  deep  ;  which  is  very  ftrange  in  a  Country  that  lies 
in  the  Latitude  of  forty  feven  Degrees,  and  fome  odd  Minutes. 
Moft  People  impute  the  extraordinary  Snow  to  the  number 
of  Mountains,  with  which  this  vaft  Continent  is  replenifh'd. 
Whatever  is  in  that  matter,  I  muft  take  notice  of  one  thing, 
that  feems  very  ftrange,  namely,  that  the  Summer  days  are 
longer  here  than  at  Paris.  The  Weather  is  then  fo  clear  and 
ferene,  that  in  three  Weeks  time  you  fhall  not  fee  a  Cloud  in 
the  Horizon.  I  hope  to  go  to  Quebec  with  the  firft  opportunity; 
for  I  have  orders  to  be  in  a  readinefs  to  imbarque  within 
fifteen  days  for  Monreal,  which  is  the  City  of  this  Country, 
that  lies  fartheft  up  towards  the  Head  of  the  River. 

I  am, 
SIR, 

Yours,  &c. 


to  North- Knitnc2i,  39 


[11]      LETTER    III. 
Dated  at  Quebec  May  15.  1684. 

Containing  an  ample  Defcription  of  the  City  of  Quebec,  and  of  the 
Ifland  of  Orleans. 

SIR, 

BEFORE  I  fet  out  for  Monreal,  I  had  the  curiofity  to  view 
the  Ifland  of  Orleans^  which  is  feven  Leagues  in  length, 
and  three  in  breadth:  It  extends  from  over  againfl:  Cape 
Tourmente,  to  within  a  League  and  a  half  of  Quebec,  at  which 
place  the  River  divides  it  felf  into  two  branches.  The  Ships 
fail  through  the  South  Channel;  for  the  North  Channel  is  fo 
foul  with  Shelves  and  Rocks,  that  the  fmall  Boats  can  only 
pafs  that  way.  The  Ifland  belongs  to  a  General  Farmer  of 
Fr^wc^,  who  would  make  out  of  it  a  thoufand  Crowns  of  yearly 
Rent,  if  himfelf  had  the  management  of  it.  'Tis  furrounded 
with  Plantations,  that  produce  all  forts  of  Grain.^ 

Quebec  is  the  Metropolitan  of  New-France,  being  almofl:  a 
League  in  Circumference ;  It  lies  in  the  Latitude  of  47  De- 
grees, and  12  Minutes.    The  Longitude  of  this  place  is  uncer- 


iThe  island  of  Orleans,  which  lies  in  the  St.  Lawrence  near  Quebec,  is  twenty- 
one  miles  long  by  about  five  in  width.  It  was  named  by  Cartier  (1535)  Isle  of  Bac- 
chus, but  subsequently  given  its  present  appellation  by  the  same  explorer.  This 
island  was  granted  as  a  fief  in  1636.  At  the  time  of  Lahontan  it  was  a  fief-noble 
in  the  possession  of  the  family  of  Berthelot.  See  Bois,  L' Isle  d' Orleans  (Quebec, 
189s).— Ed. 


40  Some  New  Voyages 

tain,i  as  well  as  that  of  feveral  other  Countries,  with  the  leave 
of  the  Geographers,  that  reckon  you  up  1200  Leagues  from 
Rochel  to  Quebec,  without  taking  the  pains  to  meafure  the 
Courfe:  However,  I  am  fure  that  it  lies  but  at  too  great  a 
diftance  from  France,  for  the  Ships  that  are  bound  hither; 
For  their  paiTage  commonly  lafts  for  two  Months  and  a  half, 
whereas  the  homeward  bound  Ships  may  in  30  or  40  days 
failing,  eafily  make  the  Belle  Ifle,  which  is  the  fureft  [12]  and 
moft  ufual  Land,  that  a  Ship  makes  upon  a  long  Voyage.  The 
reafon  of  this  diflPerence,  is,  that  the  Winds  are  Eafterly  for 
100  days  of  the  year,  and  Wefterly  for  260. 

Quebec  is  divided  into  the  upper  and  the  lower  City.  The 
Merchants  live  in  the  latter,  for  the  conveniency  of  the  Har- 
bor; upon  which  they  have  built  very  fine  Houfes,  three 
Story  high,  of  a  fort  of  Stone  that's  as  hard  as  Marble.  The 
upper  or  high  City  is  full  as  populous,  and  as  well  adorn'd  as 
the  lower.  Both  Cities  are  commanded  by  a  Caftle,  that 
ftands  upon  the  higheft  Ground.  This  Caftle  is  the  Refidence 
of  the  Governours,  and  affords  them  not  only  convenient 
Apartments,  but  the  nobleft  and  moft  extenfive  Profpe6l  in 
the  World.  Quebec  wants  two  effential  things,  namely,  a  Key 
and  Fortifications ;  though  both  the  one  and  the  other  might 
be  eafily  made,  confidering  the  conveniency  of  Stones  lying 
upon  the  fpot.^    'Tis  incompafs'd  with  feveral  Springs,  of  the 

iThe  true  latitude  of  Quebec  is  46°  49'  north;  the  longitude,  71°  13'  west  of 
Greenwich.  —  Ed. 

2  Champlain  began  the  fortifications  of  Quebec  by  the  founding  of  Fort  St.  Louis 
on  the  citadel  rock.  This  building  was  replaced  in  stone  by  his  successor  Mont- 
magny,  who  also  laid  the  foundations  for  the  first  Chateau  St.  Louis,  which  w-s 


to  iVor^^- America.  41 

beft  frefh  Water  in  the  World,  which  the  Inhabitants  draw 
out  of  Wells ;  for  they  are  fo  ignorant  of  the  Hydroftaticks, 
that  not  one  of  'em  knows  how  to  convey  the  Water  to  cer- 
tain Bafins,  in  order  to  raife  either  flat  or  fpouting  Fountains. 
Thofe  who  live  on  the  River  fide,  in  the  lower  City,  are  not 
half  fo  much  pinch'd  with  the  Cold,  as  the  Inhabitants  of  the 
upper ;  befides  that  the  former  have  a  peculiar  conveniency 
of  tranfporting  in  Boats,  Corn,  Wood,  and  other  NecefTaries, 
to  the  very  Doors  of  their  Houfes  :  But  as  the  latter  are  more 
expofs'd  to  the  injuries  of  the  Cold,  fo  they  injoy  the  benefit 
and  pleafure  of  a  cooler  Summer.  The  way  which  leads  from 
the  one  City  to  the  other  is  pretty  broad,  and  adorn'd  with 
Houfes  on  each  fide ;  only  'tis  a  little  fl:eep.  Quebec  fl:ands 
upon  a  very  uneven  Ground ;  and  its  Houfes  are  not  uniform. ^ 
The  Intendant  lives  in  a  [13]  bottom,  at  fome  fmall  difl;ance 
from  the  fide  of  a  little  River,  which  by  joyning  the  River  of 
St.  Laurence^  coops  up  the  City  in  a  right  Angle.  His  Houfe  is 
the  Palace  in  which  the  Soveraign  Council  affembles  four  times 
a  Week^;  and  on  one  fide  of  which,  we  fee  great  Magazines 


demolished  in  1694  to  make  way  for  tne  finer  structure  which  Frontenac  constructed 
during  his  last  years.  See  Gagnon,  Le  Fort  et  le  Chateau  St.  Louis  (Quebec,  1895). 
Quebec's  walls  were  not  built  until  the  latter  years  of  Frontenac;  again,  in  1720, 
Chassegros  de  Lery  made  great  improvements  in  the  circumvallation,  and  enlarged 
the  area  contained  therein.  Repairs  and  improvements  were  maintained  throughout 
the  French  rdgime.  See  Doughty  and  Dionne,  ^lebec  under  Tivo  Flags  (Quebec, 
1903)1  PP-  101-145.  —  Ed. 

1  For  a  plan  of  Quebec  at  this  period,  see  that  of  J.  B.  Franquelin  (1683),  in 
Suite,  Histoire  des  Canadiens  fran^ais,  ii,  p.  32  ;  and  another  of  1700  in  the  same 
work,  p.  49.  —  Ed. 

2  The  sovereign  council  was  established  by  the  king  upon  the  retrocession  of  the 
colony  by  the  Company  of  New  France  (1663).    It  was  first  composed  of  the  governor, 


42  Some  New  Voyages 

of  Ammunition  and  Provifions.  There  are  fix  Churches  in 
the  High  City  :  The  Cathedral  confifts  of  a  Bifhop,  and  twelve 
Prebendaries,  who  live  in  common  in  the  Chapter-Houfe,  the 
Magnificence  and  Architedlure  of  which  is  truly  wonderful. 
Thefe  poor  Priefl:s  are  a  very  good  fort  of  People ;  they  con- 
tent themfelves  with  bare  Necefl"aries,  and  meddle  with  nothing 
but  the  Affairs  of  the  Church,  where  the  Service  is  perform'd 
after  the  Roman  way.^  The  fecond  Church  is  that  of  the 
Jefuits,  which  fl:ands  in  the  Center  of  the  City ;  and  is  a  fair, 
flately,  and  well  lighted  Edifice.    The  great  Altar  of  the  Jefuits 


bishop,  and  five  appointed  councillors.  Later,  the  intendant  %vas  added  to  the  council, 
and  the  number  gradually  increased  to  twelve.  Its  functions  were  mainly  judicial, 
but  it  likewise  took  cognizance  of  civil  and  financial  affairs.  Its  records  have  been 
published. 

At  first  the  council  met  in  the  ante-room  of  the  governor's  palace,  but  upon  the 
complaint  of  the  intendant  the  ministry  ordered  the  purchase  of  the  site  of  a  brewery 
formerly  erected  by  Talon  upon  St.  Charles  River.  Here  the  intendant's  palace  was 
begun.  This  was  burned  in  1713,  being  rebuilt  upon  a  scale  of  splendor.  The  site 
is  once  more  occupied  by  a  brewery.  —  Ed. 

^  The  cathedral  of  Notre  Dame,  now  called  the  "  Basilica,"  was  long  the  only 
parish  church  of  Quebec.  Begun  in  1647,  the  first  mass  was  said  therein  three  years 
later  ;  it  was  consecrated  by  Bishop  Laval  in  1666.  In  the  early  eighteenth  century  its 
size  was  found  inadequate,  and  it  was  rebuilt  after  the  plans  of  the  chief  engineer  of 
New  France,  Chaussegros  de  Lery  (1747-48).  The  building  suffered  much  during  the 
English  siege  (1759),  all  the  wooden  parts  being  burned.  Repairs  were  instituted 
in  1769-71,  since  when  only  minor  changes  have  been  made.  The  chapter  house,  or 
Seminary,  which  had  been  begun  in  1678,  was  considered  one  of  the  finest  buildings 
in  the  country.  See  Tetu,  Histoire  du  palais  episcopal  de  ^lebec  (Quebec,  1896). 
The  Seminary  priests  officiated  as  secular  parish  cures.  Lahontan's  enconiums  are 
the  more  remarkable,  that  his  sympathies  were  seldom  with  ecclesiastics.  It  appears 
that  the  altar  and  its  columns  was  a  superfluous  invention  upon  his  part.  The  Jesuit 
historian  Charlevoix,  writing  of  this  church  in  1720  {Journal  Historique,  letter  iii), 
indicates  that  there  was  no  such  ornament,  and  indulgently  remarks  :  "  One  would 
voluntarily  pardon  that  author  [Lahontan]  if  he  disfigured  the  truth  only  to  give 
/Mster  to  churche?."  —  Ed. 


to  North' hrnQvic^.  43 

Church,  is  adorn'd  with  four  great  Cylindrical  Columns  of  one 
Stone  ;  The  Stone  being  a  fort  of  Canada  Porphyry,  and  black 
as  Jet,  without  either  Spots  or  Veins.  Thefe  Fathers  have 
very  convenient  and  large  Apartments,  beautify'd  with  plea- 
fant  Gardens,  and  feveral  rows  of  Trees,  which  are  fo  thick 
and  bufhy,  that  in  Summer  one  might  take  their  Walks  for 
an  Ice-Houfe:  And  indeed  we  may  fay  without  ftretching, 
that  there  is  Ice  not  far  from  'em,  for  the  good  Fathers  are 
never  without  a  referve  in  two  or  three  places,  for  the  cooling 
of  their  Drink.  Their  College  is  fo  fmall,  that  at  the  beft 
they  have  fcarce  fifty  Scholars  at  a  time.^  The  third  Church 
is  that  of  the  RecoUedts,  who,  through  the  interceffion  of 
Count  Frontenac^  obtain'd  leave  of  the  King  to  build  a  little 
Chappel  (which  I  call  a  Church;)  notwithftanding  the  Remon- 
ftrances  of  Mr.  de  Laval  our  Bifhop,  who,  in  concert  with  the 
Jefuits,  us'd  his  utmoft  Efforts  for  ten  years  together  to  hinder 
it.2     Before  the  building  [14]  of  this  Chappel,  they  liv'd  in  a 


1  The  Jesuits  came  to  Canada  in  1625,  and  thereafter  played  a  prominent  part 
in  the  development  of  the  colony.  Their  college  was  founded  in  1635,  a  year  before 
that  of  Harvard,  making  it  the  oldest  institution  of  learning  on  the  North  American 
continent.  The  church  occupied  the  northeast  angle  of  the  college,  on  the  site  of  the 
present  Jesuit  barracks.  The  city  hall  now  covers  the  larger  portion  of  the  site  of  the 
college  and  its  gardens.  At  the  time  of  Lahontan's  visit,  the  Jesuit  church  was  in  size 
and  decoration  far  superior  to  the  cathedral.  —  Ed. 

2  Franfois  de  Montmorency-Laval,  first  bishop  of  Canada,  was  born  in  1623  and 
educated  in  a  Jesuit  seminary.  Upon  the  death  of  his  brothers,  he  became  heir  of  a 
seigniory  in  France,  but  renounced  it  for  the  service  of  the  church.  In  1658  he  was 
made  bishop  of  Petraea  and  sent  as  vicar  apostolic  to  New  France.  In  1674  Quebec 
was  raised  to  a  bishopric,  and  Laval  made  first  bishop  thereof,  a  position  which  he 
resigned  in  1684.  Four  years  later  he  returned  to  spend  the  remainder  of  his  days 
in  Canada,  where  he  died  in  1708.  He  supported  the  Jesuits,  and  was  opposed  to 
the  re-introduction  of  the  Recollects.  —  Ed. 


44  Some  New  Voyages 

little  Hofpital  that  the  Bifliop  had  order'd  to  be  built  for  'em; 
and  fome  of  'em  continue  there  ftill.^  The  fourth  Church  is 
that  of  the  Urfelines,  which  has  been  burn'd  down  two  or 
three  times,  and  ftill  rebuilt  to  the  Advantage.  The  fifth  is 
that  of  the  Hofpital-Order,  who  take  a  particular  Care  of  the 
Sick,  tho'  themfelves  are  poor,  and  but  ill  lodg'd.^ 

The  Soveraign  Council  is  held  at  Quebec.     It  confifts  of 

twelve  Counfellors  of  *  Capa  y  de  fpada,  who 
"^See  the  Exphca-     ^^^  ^j^g  fupreme  Judicature,  and  decide  all 

Caufes  without  Appeal.  The  Intendant 
claims  a  Right  of  being  Prefident  to  the  Council;  but  in  the 
Juftice-Hall  the  Governour-General  places  himfelf  fo  as  to  face 
him,  the  Judges  being  fet  on  both  fides  of  them  ;  fo  that  one 
would  think  they  are  both  Prefidents.    While  Monficiir  de  Fron- 


1  The  Recollects  (a  branch  of  the  Franciscans)  were  the  first  ecclesiastics  to  enter 
New  France,  coming  over  in  1615.  During  their  first  occupation  they  had  a  small 
convent  called  Notre  Dame  des  Anges,  on  St.  Charles  River,  where  the  General  Hos- 
pital of  Quebec  is  now  situated.  After  the  capture  of  Quebec  by  the  English  (1628) , 
the  friars  were  sent  back  to  France ;  and  the  order  did  not  return  to  this  field  until 
1670,  when  they  were  sent  out  as  a  counterpoise  to  the  Jesuits.  Frontenac  favored 
this  order,  and  gave  them  a  concession  of  land  facing  the  governor's  palace,  where 
they  built  the  chapel  here  mentioned  by  Lahontan,  although  some  of  the  brothers 
were  still  living  at  their  suburban  convent,  Notre  Dame  des  Anges.  This  church 
of  the  Recollects  was  one  of  the  finest  in  New  France,  being  finished  in  1681. 
Charlevoix  said  in  the  next  century,  that  it  was  "worthy  of  Versailles."  In  1796  it 
was  burned,  the  site  now  being  occupied  by  the  Anglican  cathedral  of  Quebec  ;  the 
court  house  occupies  a  portion  of  the  convent  grounds.  —  Ed. 

2  The  Ursulines  were  the  first  order  of  nuns  to  come  to  New  France  (1639),  which 
they  did  under  the  patronage  of  Madame  de  la  Peltrie.  Two  years  later  they  began 
their  convent,  which  still  occupies  the  original  site,  although  the  buildings  have  sev- 
eral times  been  burned,  and  recently  much  enlarged. 

The  Hospitalieres  came  over  at  the  same  time  as  the  Ursulines,  and  founded  Hotel 
Dieu,  a  great  hospital  which  still  exists  on  the  same  site  where  the  corner  stone  was 
laid  in  1654.  —  Ed. 


to  North- Am^nc^i,  45 

tenac  was  in  Canada^  he  laugh'd  at  the  pretended  Precedency 
of  the  Intendants ;  nay  he  ufed  the  Members  of  that  Afifembly 
as  roughly  as  Cromwell  did  the  Parliament  of  England.  At 
this  Court  every  one  pleads  his  own  Caufe,  for  Sollicitors  or 
Barrifters  never  appear  there  ;  by  which  means  it  comes  to 
pafs,  that  Law-Suits  are  quickly  brought  to  a  Period,  without 
demanding  Court  Fees  or  any  other  Charges  from  the  con- 
tending Parties.  The  Judges,  who  have  but  four  hundred 
Livers  a  Year  from  the  King,  have  a  Difpenfation  of  not 
wearing  the  Robe  and  the  Cap.  Befides  this  Tribunal,  we 
have  in  this  Country  a  Lieutenant-General,  both  Civil  and 
Military,  an  Attorney-General,  the  Great  Provoft,  and  a  Chief 
Juftice  in  Eyre.^ 

The  way  of  travelling  in  the  Winter,  whether  in  Town  or 
Country,  is  that  of  Sledges  drawn  by  Horfes ;  who  are  fo 
infenfible  of  the  Cold,  that  I  have  feen  fifty  or  fixty  of  'em  in 
January  and  February  ^?ind  in  the  Snow  up  to  their  Breaft,  in  the 
[15]  midft  of  a  Wood,  without  ever  offering  to  go  near  their 
Owner's  Houfe.  In  the  Winter-time  they  travel  from  Quebec  to 
Monreal  upon  the  Ice,  the  River  being  then  frozen  over;  and 
upon  that  occafion  thefe  Sledges  will  run  you  fifteen  Leagues 
a  day.  Others  have  their  Sledges  drawn  by  two  Maftiff  Dogs, 
but  then  they  are  longer  by  the  way.  As  for  their  way  of 
travelling  in  Summer,  I  fhall  tranfmit  you  an  Account  of  it, 
when  I  come  to  be  better  inform'd.    I  am  told  that  the  People 


^One  of  the  chief  causes  of  dissension  between  Frontenac  and  the  intendant,  was 
the  presidency  of  the  supreme  council.  See  Parkman,  Frontenac,  pp.  47-71.  On 
the  officers  of  justice,  see  Weir,  Administration  of  Old  Regime,  pp.  63-67.  —  Ed. 


46  Some  New  Voyages 

of  this  Country  will  go  a  thoufand  Leagues  in  Canows  of 
Bark;  a  Defcription  of  which  you  may  exped,  as  foon  as  I 
have  made  ufe  of  'em.  The  Eafterly  Winds  prevail  here  com- 
monly in  the  Spring  and  Autumn ;  and  the  Wefterly  have  the 
Afcendant  in  Winter  and  Summer.  Adieu  Sir:  I  muft  now 
make  an  end  of  my  Letter,  for  my  Matter  begins  to  run  fhort. 
All  I  can  fay,  is,  that  as  foon  as  I  am  better  inftru6led  in  what 
relates  to  the  Commerce,  and  the  Civil  and  Ecclefiaftical  Gov- 
ernment of  the  Country,  I'll  tranfmit  you  fuch  exadl  Memoirs 
of  the  fame,  as  fhall  give  you  full  fatisfadlion.  Thefe  you  may 
expedl  with  the  firft  Opportunity ;  for  in  all  Appearance  our 
Troops  will  return  after  the  Conclufion  of  the  Campaign  that 
we  are  now  going  to  make  in  the  Country  of  the  Iroqtiefe, 
under  the  Command  of  Monfietir  de  la  Barre.  In  feven  or 
eight  Days  time  I  mean  to  imbark  for  Monreal ;  and  in  the 
mean  time  am  going  to  make  a  Progrefs  to  the  Villages  of 
Scilleri,  of  Saut  de  la  Chaudiere,  and  of  Lorete^  which  are  inhab- 
ited by  the  Abenakis  and  the  Hurons.  Thefe  Places  are  not 
above  three  or  four  Leagues  off;  fo  that  I  may  return  with 
eafe  next  Week.  As  for  the  Manners  of  the  People,  I  cannot 
pretend  to  defcribe  'em  fo  foon ;  for  a  juft  Obfervation  and 
Knowledge  of  thefe  things  cannot  be  compafs'd  without  time. 
I  have  been  this  Winter  at  hunting  with  thirty  or  [16]  forty 
young  Jlgonkins,  who  were  well  made  clever  Fellows.  My 
Defign  in  accompanying  them,  was,  to  learn  their  Language, 
which  is  mightily  efteem'd  in  this  Country ;  for  all  the  other 
Nations  for  a  thoufand  Leagues  round  (excepting  the  Iroqtiefe 
and  the  Hurons)  underftand  it  perfedlly  well;   nay,  all  their 


to  iVor^Z>-America.  47 

refpedive  Tongues  come  as  near  to  this,  as  the  Portuguefe  does 
to  the  Spanifli}  I  have  already  made  my  felf  Mafter  of  fome 
Words  with  a  great  deal  of  Facility;  and  they  being  mightily 
pleafed  in  feeing  a  Stranger  ftudy  their  Tongue  take  all  imag- 
inable pains  to  inftrudl  me.     I  am, 

SIR, 

Yours,  &c. 


1  The  Algonquian  language  was  the  most  wide-spread  of  the  Indian  dialects  of 
North  America,  being  used  by  most  of  the  tribes  east  of  the  Mississippi  and  south  of 
Hudson  Bay.  The  Huron-Iroquois  stock  were  aliens  in  their  midst.  See  Powell, 
"Linguistic  Families  of  North  America,"  in  U.  S.  Bureau  of  Ethnology  Report, 
1885-86. 

The  Algonkins  proper  were  a  tribe  whose  original  home  was  in  the  province  of 
Quebec.     See  Jesuit  Relations,  index.  —  Ed. 


48  Some  New  Voyages 


LETTER    IV. 

Dated  at  Monreal,  June  14.  1684. 

Containing  a  h'ief  Defcription  of  the  Habitations  of  the  Savages  in 

the  Neighbourhood  of  Quebec  ;  Of  the  River  of  St.  Lawrence, 

&€.  as  far  up  as  Monreal;  Of  a  curious  way  of  fifhing  Eels; 

^  ^  ,       and  of  the  Cities  o/TroIs  Rivieres  and  Mon- 

"^  Coureurs      de  -^  -^  r  1     r>     j   ex 

Bois.  See  the  Ex-     ^^^^  '•  'together  with  an  Account  of  the  Londutl 

plication  Table.       of  the  *  Forrefl  Rangers  or  Pedlers. 

SIR, 

BEFORE  my  Departure  from  Quebec,  I  vifited  the  adjacent 
Villages  inhabited  by  the  Savages.  The  Village  oi  Lorete 
is  peopled  by  two  hundred  Families  [17]  of  Hurons,  who  were 
converted  to  Chriftianity  by  the  Jefuits,  though  with  a  great 
deal  of  Reludancy.^  The  Villages  of  Silleri,  and  of  Saut  de  la 
Chaudiere,  are  compos'd  of  three  hundred  Famihes  oiAbenakis, 
who  are  likewife  Chriftians,  and  among  whom  the  Jefuits  have 

^The  village  of  Lorette  was  a  mission  colony  of  the  Jesuits,  founded  after  the 
destruction  of  the  Huron  mission  by  the  Iroquois  (16+9).  Part  of  the  instructed 
Hurons  sought  the  fathers  at  Quebec,  and  were  first  established  on  the  Isle  of  Orleans  ; 
later,  during  the  Iroquois  war,  the  remnant  was  removed  to  a  less-exposed  situation, 
and  by  1669  settled  at  Notre  Dame  de  Foye  (now  Ste.  Foye).  A  few  years  later, 
this  colony  removed  to  the  village  of  Lorette  (now  Ancienne  Lorette) ,  and  there  Lahon- 
tan  visited  them.  In  1697,  impelled  by  need  of  fresh  fuel  and  land,  they  founded  the 
village  of  Jeune  Lorette,  eight  miles  from  Montreal,  which  became  their  final  home, 
and  where  a  remnant  of  the  Huron  race  is  still  to  be  found.  —  Ed. 


to  North'AvciQv\c2i,  49 

fetled  MifHonaries.^  I  return'd  to  Quebec  time  enough,  and 
imbarqued  under  the  condud:  of  a  Mafter,  that  would  rather 
have  had  a  Lading  of  Goods,  than  of  Soldiers.  The  North- 
Eaft  Winds  wafted  us  in  five  or  fix  days  to  Trois  Rivieres^ 
which  is  the  name  of  a  fmall  City,  feated  at  the  diftance  of 
thirty  Leagues  from  hence.  That  City  derives  its  name  from 
three  Rivers,  that  fpring  from  one  Channel,  and  after  continu- 
ing their  divifion  for  fome  fpace  re-unite  into  a  joynt  Stream, 
that  falls  into  the  River  of  St.  Laurence,  about  half  a  quarter  of 
a  League  below  the  Town.  Had  we  fail'd  all  Night,  the  Tides 
would  have  carry'd  us  thither  in  two  days  time ;  but  in  regard 
that  the  River  is  full  of  Rocks  and  Shelves,  we  durft  not  ven- 
ture upon  it  in  the  dark ;  fo,  we  came  to  an  Anchor  every 
Night,  which  did  not  at  all  difpleafe  me ;  for  in  the  courfe  of 
thirty  Leagues,  (notwithfl:anding  the  darknefs  of  the  Night) 
it  gave  me  an  opportunity  of  viewing  an  infinite  number  of 
Habitations  on  each  fide  of  the  River,  which  are  not  above 
a  Musket-Shot  diftant  one  from  another.  The  Inhabitants 
that  are  fetled  between  Quebec  and  fifteen  Leagues  higher, 
diverted  me  very  agreeably  with  the  fifiiing  of  Eels.     At  low 


^The  mission  colony  at  Sillery  was  originally  founded  for  the  Algonkins,  Mon- 
tagnais,  etc.;  but  its  inhabitants  were  decimated  by  disease  and  the  ravages  of  intoxi- 
cation, so  that  the  converted  Abenaki  from  Maine,  who  began  coming  to  Canada 
about  1680,  formed  the  main  body  of  the  colony.  The  mission  was  maintained  here 
until  1699,  when  the  land  which  had  been  ceded  in  trust  for  the  Indian  converts  was 
retroceded  to  the  Jesuit  order. 

"  Le  Saut  de  la  Chaudiere  "  was  a  village  on  the  river  of  that  name,  opposite 
Quebec,  where  was  established  about  the  time  Lahontan  arrived  in  Canada,  the  Aben- 
aki mission  of  St.  Frangois  de  Sales.  In  1700  all  the  scattered  villages  were  collected 
in  one,  which  exists  till  the  present  time  —  that  of  St.  Francois  du  Lac,  in  Yamaska 

County,  Quebec.  —  Ed. 
4 


50  Some  New  Voyages 

water  they  ftretch  out  Hurdles  to  the  lo weft  Water-M ark; 
and  that  fpace  of  ground  being  then  dry  by  the  retreat  of  the 
Water,  is  cover'd  over,  and  fhut  up  by  the  Hurdles.  Between 
the  Hurdles  they  place  at  certain  diftances  Inftruments  call'd 
Ruches^  from  the  refemblance  they  bear  to  a  Bee-hive ;  befides 
Baskets  and  little  Nets  belag'd  upon  a  Pole,  which  they  call 
Bouteux,  and  Bouts  de  Quievres.  Then  they  let  all  ftand  in  this 
fafhion  for  three  Months  in  [i8]  the  Spring,  and  two  in  the 
Autumn.  Now  as  often  as  the  Tide  comes  in,  the  Eels  look- 
ing out  for  fhallow  places,  and  making  towards  the  Shoar, 
croud  in  among  the  Hurdles,  which  hinder  'em  afterwards  to 
retire  with  the  Ebb-water;  upon  that  they  are  forc'd  to  bury 
themfelves  in  the  abovementioned  Ingines,  which  are  fome- 
times  fo  over-cram'd,  that  they  break.  When  'tis  low  water, 
the  Inhabitants  take  out  thefe  Eels,  which  are  certainly  the 
biggeft,  and  the  longeft  in  the  World.  They  fait  them  up  in 
Barrels,  where  they'll  keep  a  whole  year  without  fpoiling : 
And  indeed  they  give  an  admirable  relifh  in  all  Sauces ;  nay, 
there's  nothing  that  the  Council  of  Quebec  defires  more,  than 
that  this  Fifhery  fhould  be  equally  plentiful  in  all  years. 

Trois  Rivieres  is  a  little  paltry  Town,  feated  in  the  Latitude 
of  forty  fix  Degrees;  'tis  not  fortified  neither  with  Stone,  nor 
Pales.  The  River  to  which  it  owes  its  name,  takes  its  rife  an 
hundred  Leagues  to  the  North- Weft,  from  the  greateft  ridge 
of  Mountains  in  the  Univerfe.  The  Algonkins  who  are  at 
prefent  an  Erratick  fort  of  Savages,  and,  like  the  Jrabs,  have 
no  fetled  Abode;  that  People,  I  fay,  feldom  ftraggle  far  from 
the  banks  of  this  River,  upon  which  they  have  excellent  Beaver- 


to  North' Ammc2i,  51 

hunting.  In  former  times  the  Iroquefe  cut  off  three  fourths  of 
that  Nation ;  but  they  have  not  dar'd  to  renew  their  Incur- 
fions,  fince  the  French  have  Peopled  the  Countries  that  lie 
higher  up  upon  the  River  of  St.  Laurence.  I  call'd  Trois  Riv- 
ieres a  little  Town,  with  reference  to  the  paucity  of  the  Inhab- 
itants ;  though  at  the  fame  time  they  are  very  rich,  and  live  in 
ftately  Houfes.  The  King  has  made  it  the  Refidence  of  a 
Governor,  who  would  die  for  Hunger,  if  he  did  not  trade 
with  the  Natives  for  Beavers,  when  his  fmall  allowance  is  out: 
Befides,  a  Man  that  would  live  there,  muft  be  of  the  like  tem- 
per with  a  Dog,  or  at  leaft  he  muft  take  pleafure  in  fcratching 
[19]  his  Skin,  for  the  Flea's  are  there  more  numerous  than 
the  grains  of  Sand.  I  am  inform'd,  that  the  Natives  of  this 
place  make  the  beft  Soldiers  in  the  Country.^ 

Three  Leagues  higher  we  enter'd  St.  Peter's  Lake,  which  is 
fix  Leagues  long,  and  had  difficulty  enough  in  croffing  it ;  for 
the  frequent  Calms  oblig'd  us  to  caft  Anchor  feveral  times. 
It  receives  three  or  four  Rivers  that  abound  with  Fifh ;  upon 
the  Mouth  of  which,  I  defcry'd  with  my  Telefcope  very  fine 
Houfes.2    Towards  the  Evening  we  fail'd  out  of  that  Lake 


^  For  the  history  of  Trois  Rivieres,  on  the  St.  Lawrence  at  the  mouth  of  Maurice 
River,  see  Suite,  "  La  Riviere  des  Trois  Rivieres,"  Roy.  Soc.  Proc,  1901,  pp.  97- 
116.  — Ed. 

2  Lake  St.  Peters  was  christened  Lac  d'AngouIeme  by  Cartier ;  but  Champlain 
crossing  it  on  the  day  of  the  saint,  changed  the  name  in  the  iatter's  honor.  It  is  an 
enlargement  of  the  St.  Lawrence,  twenty-five  miles  long  by  about  nine  broad,  in  the 
midst  of  the  most  fertile  region  of  Lower  Canada.  It  receives  several  rivers,  chief  of 
which  are  the  Du  Loup  and  Maskinonge  from  the  north  ;  the  Nicoiet,  St.  Francis, 
and  Yamaska  from  the  south,  not  including  River  Richelieu,  which  enters  the  St. 
Lawrence  at  the  upper  end  of  the  lake.  —  Ed. 


UBRARf  


52  Some  New  Voyages 

with  a  frelh  Eafterly  Gale ;  and  though  we  hoifted  up  all  our 
Sails,  the  Current  run  fo  ftrong  againft  us,  that  'twas  three 
hours  before  we  could  make  Sorely  which  was  two  fmall 
Leagues  ofiF.^  Sorel  is  a  Canton  of  four  Leagues  in  front, 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  which,  a  certain  River  conveys  the 
waters  of  Champlain  Lake,  to  the  River  of  St.  Laurence^ 
after  having  form'd  a  Water-fall  of  two  Leagues  at  Cbambli.^ 
Though  we  reckon  but  eight  Leagues  from  Sorel  to  Monreal, 
yet  we  fpent  three  days  in  failing  between  'em ;  by  reafon 
partly  of  flack  Winds,  and  partly  of  the  ftrength  of  the  Cur- 
rents. In  this  courfe  we  faw  nothing  but  Iflands ;  and  both 
fides  of  the  River  all  along  from  Quebec  to  this  place,  are  fo 
replenifh'd  with  Inhabitants,  that  one  may  juflly  call  'em  two 
continued  Villages  of  fixty  Leagues  in  length. 

This  place,  which  goes  by  the  name  of  Fillemarie,  or 
Monreal,  lies  in  the  Latitude  of  forty  five  Degrees,  and  fome 
Minutes ;  being  feated  in  an  Ifland  of  the  fame  name,  which 
is  about  five  Leagues  broad,  and  fourteen  Leagues  long.  The 
Directors  of  the  Seminary  of  St.  Sulpitius  at  Paris,  are  the  Pro- 
prietors of  the  Ifland,  and  have  the  nomination  of  a  Bailifi^, 
and  feveral  other  Magifbrates ;  nay,  in  former  times  they  had 

^  Fort  Sorel  was  built  by  an  officer  of  that  name  (Pierre  de  Saurel),  In  1665. 
Three  years  later  he  married  the  daughter  of  a  Canadian  seigneur,  and  in  1672 
received  a  grant  of  the  seigniory  of  Sorel,  where  he  lived  until  his  death  in  1682. —  Ed, 

^Chambly  was  named  for  Jacques  de  Chambly,  captain  in  the  Carignan  regi- 
ment, whom  Tracy  sent  (1665)  to  build  an  advance  fort  against  the  Iroquois.  He 
received  the  surounding  land  as  a  seigniory  in  1672,  but  the  next  year  was  sent  to 
command  In  Acadia.  Later  he  removed  to  Grenada,  and  Chambly  passed  to  his 
nephew.  — Ed. 


to  North' A.m.tv\c2i,  53 

the  priviledge  of  nominating  a  Governor.^  This  little  Town 
lies  all  open  without  any  Fortification  [20]  either  of  Stone 
or  Wood :  But  its  fituation  is  fo  advantageous,  notwith- 
flanding  that  it  ftands  upon  an  uneven  and  fandy  Ground, 
that  it  might  eafily  be  made  an  impregnable  Poft.  The  River 
of  St.  Laurence  which  runs  juft  by  the  Houfes,  on  one  fide  of 
this  Town,  is  not  Navigable  further,  by  reafon  of  its  rapidity ; 
for  about  half  a  quarter  of  a  League  higher,  'tis  full  of  rapid 
falls,  Eddy's,  ^c.  Mr.  Perot  the  Governor  of  the  Town,  who 
has  but  a  thoufand  Crowns  a  year  Sallary ;  has  made  fhift  to 
get  fifty  thoufand  in  a  few  years,  by  trading  with  the  Savages 
in  Skins  and  Furs.^  The  Bailiff  of  the  Town  gets  but  little 
by  his  place,  no  more  than  his  Officers :  So  that  the  Mer- 
chants are  the  only  Perfons  that  make  Money  here ;  for 
the  Savages  that  frequent  the  great  Lakes  of  Canada^  come 
down  hither  almoft  every  year  with  a  prodigious  quantity  of 


1  Montreal  was  a  religious  colony,  founded  (1642)  by  a  society  of  Associates  of 
Montreal,  who  received  the  island  as  a  seigniory.  In  1663  the  number  of  the  Asso- 
ciates being  much  diminished,  the  Sulpitians  of  Paris  agreed  to  take  charge  of  the 
enterprise,  and  the  seigniory  was  transferred  to  them,  with  the  rights  here  mentioned 
by  Lahontan.  The  Sulpitians  held  their  seigniorial  privileges  until  the  abolition  of 
feudal  tenure  in  1854  ;  they  still  retain  much  land  in  Montreal  and  vicinity.  —  Ed. 

2  Francois  Marie  Perrot  came  to  Canada  with  the  intendant  Talon  (1670),  whose 
niece  he  had  married.  Upon  the  request  of  Talon,  the  Sulpitians  named  him  gov- 
ernor of  Montreal,  a  grant  which  was  later  confirmed  by  the  king.  Perrot  abused  his 
privileges  to  enrich  himself,  and  protected  the  coureurs  des  bois.  Involved  in  a  dis- 
pute with  Frontenac,  the  governor  arrested  Perrot  and  sent  him  to  France  for  trial. 
The  ministry,  after  punishing  him  by  a  brief  imprisonment  in  the  Bastille,  restored 
him  to  his  governorship,  where  he  remained  until  1684.  In  this  year  he  was  ap- 
pointed governor  of  Acadia,  which  position  he  held  for  three  years.  After  his  recall, 
he  remained  in  the  country  as  a  trader,  and  in  1690  was  captured  by  the  English. 
The  date  of  his  death  is  unknown.  —  Ed. 


54  Some  New  Voyages 

Beavers-Skins,  to  be  given  in  exchange  for  Arms,  Kettles, 
Axes,  Knives,  and  a  thoufand  fuch  things,  upon  which  the 
Merchants  clear  two  hundred  per  Cent.  Commonly  the  Gov- 
ernor General  comes  hither  about  the  time  of  their  coming 
down,  in  order  to  fhare  the  profit,  and  receive  Prefents  from 
that  People.  The  Pedlers  call'd  Coiirettrs  de  Bois,  export 
from  hence  every  year  feveral  Canows  full  of  Merchandife, 
which  they  difpofe  of  among  all  the  Savage  Nations  of  the 
Continent,  by  way  of  exchange  for  Beaver-Skins.  Seven  or 
eight  days  ago,  I  faw  twenty  five  or  thirty  of  thefe  Canows 
return  with  heavy  Cargoes ;  each  Canow  was  manag'd  by  two 
or  three  Men,  and  carry'd  twenty  hundred  weight,  /'.  e.  forty 
packs  of  Beaver  Skins,  which  are  worth  an  hundred  Crowns  a 
piece.  Thefe  Canows  had  been  a  year  and  eighteen  Months* 
out.  You  would  be  amaz'd  if  you  faw  how  lewd  thefe  Ped- 
lers are  when  they  return ;  how  they  Feafb  and  Game,  and 
how  prodigal  they  are,  not  only  in  their  Cloaths,  but  [21] 
upon  Women.  Such  of  'em  as  are  married,  have  the  wifdom 
to  retire  to  their  own  Houfes ;  but  the  Batchelors  a6t  juft 
as  our  Eafi-India-Nltn,  and  Pirates  are  wont  to  do ;  for  they 
Lavifh,  Eat,  Drink,  and  Play  all  away  as  long  as  the  Goods 
hold  out ;  and  when  thefe  are  gone,  they  e'en  fell  their  Em- 
broidery, their  Lace,  and  their  Cloaths.  This  done,  they  are 
forc'd  to  go  upon  a  new  Voyage  for  Subfiflance. 

The  Dire6tors  of  the  Seminary  of  St.  Sulpitius,  take  care 
to  fend  MifTionaries  hither  from  time  to  time,  who  live  under 
the  diredlion  of  a  Superiour,  that  is  very  much  refpeded  in 
the  Country.     They  have  Apartments  allotted  for  'em  in  a 


to  North-Amtncz,  55 

ftately,  great,  and  pleafant  Houfe,  built  of  Free-ftone.^  This 
Houfe  is  built  after  the  Model  of  that  of  St.  Sulpice  at  Paris  ; 
and  the  Altar  ftands  by  it  felf,  juft  like  that  at  Paris.  Their 
Seignories  or  Cantons  that  lye  on  the  South-fide  of  the  Ifland, 
produce  a  confiderable  Revenue  ;  for  the  Plantations  are  good, 
and  the  Inhabitants  are  rich  in  Corn,  Cattle,  Fowl,  and  a 
thoufand  other  Commodities,  for  which  they  find  a  Mercat  in 
the  City:  But  the  North  part  of  the  Ifland  lies  wafte.  Thefe 
Diredors  would  never  fuffer  the  Jefuits  or  Recolledts  to  dif- 
play  their  Banners  here ;  though  'tis  conjedlur'd,  that  at  the 
long  run  they'll  be  forc'd  to  confent  to  it.  At  the  diftance  of 
a  League  from  the  Town,  I  faw  at  the  foot  of  a  Mountain,  a 
Plantation  of  Iroqueje  Chriftians,  who  are  infl:ru6led  by  two 
*  Priefts  of  the  Order  of  Siilpitius,^  and  I'm  inform'd  of  a  larger 


1  The  Seminary  of  St.  Sulpice,  whose  priests  were  known  as  Sulpitians,  was 
founded  at  Vaugirard  in  1640,  by  Jean  Jacques  Olier,  a  young  Parisian  priest,  one  of 
the  Associates  of  Montreal,  The  next  year  the  Seminary  was  established  at  Paris, 
and  by  1657  the  first  Sulpitian  arrived  in  Canada.  At  Montreal  they  were  eagerly 
welcomed,  became  the  cures  of  the  parish,  and  later  seigneurs  of  the  island  (see  ante, 
p.  53,  note  i).  The  first  superior  was  Queylus,  upon  whose  retirement  (1671) 
Franfois  Casson  de  Dollier  succeeded  to  the  position.  The  latter  came  to  Canada  in 
1666  after  service  in  the  armies  of  France.  His  first  office  was  chaplain  in  an  expedi- 
tion against  the  Mohawks  ;  later  (1669) ,  he  accompanied  La  Salle  on  his  first  voyage 
of  Western  exploration.  Returning  to  Montreal  the  following  spring,  he  served  as 
superior  of  the  Sulpitians  until  his  death  (1671-1701).  The  earliest  historian  of 
Montreal,  his  manuscript  was  first  published  in  1871,  —  Ed. 

2  The  Sulpitians  founded  (1677)  the  Iroquois  mission  called  from  its  location. 
La  Montagne,  where  were  an  Indian  village,  a  school  for  boys,  and  another  for  girls, 
all  aided  by  a  pension  from  the  king.  During  Frontenac's  War  (1691)  this  village 
was  raided  and  thirty-five  prisoners  taken.  Some  years  later  (1704) ,  the  mission  was 
removed  to  Sault  au  Recollet,  and  sixteen  years  later  became  the  nucleus  of  the  Indian 
village  of  Oka  on  the  Lake  of  Two  Mountains,  which  still  exists.  See  Canadian 
Indian  Department  Report,  1901,  p.  49.  —  Ed. 


56  Some  New  Voyages 

and  more  populous  Plantation  on  t'other  fide  of  the  River,  at 
the  diftance  of  two  Leagues  from  hence,  which  is  took  care  of 
by  Father  Bruyas  the  Jefuit.^  I  hope  to  fet  out  from  hence,  as 
foon  as  Mr.  de  la  Barre  receives  advice  from  France ;  for  he 
defigns  to  leave  Quebec  upon  the  arrival  of  the  firft  Ship.  I 
refolve  to  go  to  Fort  Frontenac^  upon  the  Lake  that  [22]  goes 
by  the  fame  name.  If  I  may  credit  thofe  who  have  been  form- 
erly in  A6lion  againft  the  Iroquefe,  I  fhall  be  able  upon  my 
return  from  this  Campaign,  to  inform  you  of  fome  things  that 
will  feem  as  ftrange  to  you,  as  they  will  be  difagreeable  to  my 

felf.     I  am, 

SIR, 

Tours,  &c. 


1  The  Jesuit  mission  was  known  as  St.  Francois  du  Sault,  from  its  location  on 
Sault  St.  Louis.  It  was  established  at  La  Prairie  de  la  Madeleine  in  1669,  and  in 
1676  removed  to  this  place,  which  is  now  known  as  Caughnawaga.  Father  Jacques 
Bruyas  came  to  the  Canadian  mission  in  1666,  and  labored  during  the  rest  of  his  life 
among  the  Iroquois.  In  1679  he  took  charge  of  the  mission  at  Sault  St.  Louis,  where 
he  lived  until  his  death  in  1712.  He  was  superior  of  Canada  missions  1693-98,  and 
in  1700-01  was  instrumental  in  adjusting  peace  with  the  Iroquois.  A  linguist  of 
repute,  he  prepared  the  first  grammar  of  the  Mohawk  language.  —  Ed. 


to  North- h.vntnc2.,  57 


LETTER   V. 

Dated  at  Monreal  June  18.  1684. 
In  which  is  contain'd  a /hort  account  of  the  Iroquefe,  with  a  view 
of  the  War  and  Peace  they  made  with  the  French,  and  of  the 
means  by  which  it  zvas  brought  about. 

SIR, 

I  WROTE  to  you  but  four  days  ago,  and  did  not  think  to 
have  heard  from  you  fo  foon;  but  this  Morning  I  met  with 
a  very  agreeable  Surprifal,  in  receiving  a  Packet  addrefs'd  to 
me  by  your  Brother.  You  may  be  fure  I  was  infinitely  well 
pleas'd,  in  being  given  to  underftand  what  has  pafs'd  in 
Europe  fince  I  left  it.  The  knowledge  of  the  Affairs  oi  Europe 
is  comfortable  to  one  that's  doom'd  to  another  World,  fuch 
as  this  is,  and  I  cannot  but  acknowledge  my  felf  infinitely  in- 
debted to  you,  for  the  exa6lnefs  of  your  Intelligence.  In  as 
much  as  you  require  of  me  an  account  of  the  Iroquefe,  and 
would  have  me  to  prefent  you  with  a  juft  view  of  their  Temper 
and  Government ;  I  would  willingly  fatisfie  and  oblige  you  in 
that,  or  any  other  point :  But  in  regard  [23]  that  I  am  oblig'd 
to  fet  out  for  Fort  Frontenac  the  day  after  to  morrow,  I  have 
not  time  to  inform  my  felf  of  things,  or  to  confult  thofe  who 
have  been  in  the  Country  before :  So  that  all  I  can  do  at  pref- 
ent, is  only  to  acquaint  you  with  what  I  have  learn'd  this 
Winter,  from  Perfons  that  have  fojourn'd  twenty  years  among 


58  Some  New  Voyages 

'em.  As  foon  as  I  have  an  opportunity  of  inlarging  my  knowl- 
edge upon  that  Head,  by  a  more  immediate  converfation  with 
themfelves,  you  may  affure  your  felf  that  I'll  impart  it  to  you. 
In  the  mean  time,  be  pleas'd  to  accept  of  what  follows. 

Thefe  Barbarians  are  drawn  up  in  five  Cantons,  not  unlike 
thofe  of  the  Swijfes.  Tho'  thefe  Cantons  are  all  of  one  Nation, 
and  united  in  one  joynt  intereft,  yet  they  go  by  different 
names,  viz.  the  Tfonontotians,  the  Goyogoans,  the  Onnotagues^  the 
Onoyouts,  and  the  Agnies.  Their  Language  is  almoft  the  fame  ; 
and  the  five  Villages  or  Plantations  in  which  they  live,  lie  at 
the  diflance  of  thirty  Leagues  one  from  another,  being  all 
feated  near  the  South  fide  of  the  Lake  of  Ontario^  or  of  Fronte- 
nac.  Every  year  the  five  Cantons  fend  Deputies  to  alTift  at  the 
Union  Feaft,  and  to  fmoak  in  the  great  Calumet,  or  Pipe  of  the 
five  Nations.  Each  Village  or  Canton  contains  about  four- 
teen thoufand  Souls,  i.  e.  1500  that  bear  Arms,  2000  Super- 
annuated Men,  4000  Women,  2000  Maids,  and  4000  Children: 
Tho'  indeed  fome  will  tell  you,  that  each  Village  has  not  above 
loooo  or  1 1000  Souls.^  There  has  been  an  Alliance  of  long 
ftanding  between  thefe  Nations  and  the  Engli/Ji,  and  by  trad- 
ing in  Furrs  to  New-For^,  they  are  fupply'd  by  the  EngUJh 


1  "Iroquois"  was  a  title  bestowed  by  the  French  ;  the  tribesmen  called  them- 
selves "  People  of  the  Long  House  ";  to  the  English,  they  were  known  as  the  "  Five 
Nations."  Lahontan  gives  the  five  confederates  of  the  league  in  the  French  form  of 
their  names  ;  the  English  called  them  —  proceeding  in  the  same  order,  from  west  to 
east  —  Seneca,  Cayuga,  Onondaga,  Oneida,  and  Mohawk.  Among  the  Onondaga 
was  the  principal  council  house,  where  each  year  the  "  union  feast  "  was  held,  and 
the  forthcoming  policy  deliberated.  Lahontan  has  greatly  exaggerated  the  numbers 
of  these  Indians  ;  it  is  doubtful  whether  they  ever  mustered  more  than  2,500  warriors, 
implying  a  population  of  10,000  to  12,000.  See  Jesuit  Relations,  index  ;  Parkman, 
Jesuits,  p.  Ixvi. — Ed. 


to  North-Kvamcdi.  59 

with  Arms,  Ammunition,  and  all  other  Neceffaries,  at  a  cheaper 
rate  than  the  French  can  afford  'em  at.  They  have  no  other 
confideration  for  England  or  France^  than  what  depends  upon 
the  occafion  they  have  for  the  Commodities  of  thefe  two 
Nations ;  though  after  all  they  [24]  give  an  over-purchafe ; 
for  they  pay  for  them  four  times  more  than  they  are  worth. 
They  laugh  at  the  Menaces  of  our  Kings  and  Governors,  for 
they  have  no  notion  of  dependence,  nay,  the  very  word  is  to 
them  infupportable.  They  look  upon  themfelves  as  Sov- 
eraigns,  accountable  to  none  but  God  alone,  whom  they  call 
The  Great  Spirit.  They  waged  War  with  us  almoft  always, 
from  the  firft  fettlement  of  our  Colonies  in  Canada^  to  the 
firft  years  of  the  Count  of  Frontenac's  Government.  Mcjfieurs 
de  Courfelles,  and  de  Traci,  both  of  'em  Governors-General, 
made  Head  againft  the  Agniis  upon  the  Champlain  Lake,  in 
Winter  as  well  as  in  Summer ;  but  they  could  not  boaft  of  any 
great  Succefs.^  They  only  burnt  their  Villages,  p"^  rarry'd 
off  fome  hundred  of  their  Children,  of  whom  the  above- 
mention'd  Iroquefe  Chriftians  are  fprung.  'Tis  true,  they  cut 
off  ninety  or  an  hundred  Warriours ;  but  in  compenfation  for 

^  The  Iroquois  had  harassed  New  France  almost  from  its  inception.  Alexandre 
de  Prouville,  marquis  de  Tracy,  was  chosen  (1664)  lieufenant-general  of  French  colo- 
nies in  America.  An  old  army  officer  who  had  served  with  efficiency  in  the  West 
Indies,  his  arrival  (1665)  was  hailed  with  joy  by  the  distressed  colonists.  Shortly 
after  came  Daniel  de  Remy,  sieur  de  Courcelle,  the  newly-appointed  governor,  and 
detachments  of  the  Carignan  regiment.  Courcelle's  first  expedition  against  the  Iro- 
quois, in  the  winter  of  1665-66,  was  without  success.  Whereupon  Tracy  took  up  the 
matter,  and  in  the  autumn  of  1666  led  an  expedition  via  Lake  Champlain,  which 
burned  the  Mohawk  towns  and  cowed  these  savages  into  an  advantageous  peace. 
The  following  year  (1667)  Tracy  returned  to  France,  to  die  there  three  years  later. 
Courcelle  remained  as  governor  until  1672,  when  failing  health  caused  his  retirement, 
he  being  replaced  by  Count  de  Frontenac.  — Ed. 


6o  Some  New  Voyages 

that,  feveral  Canadans,  and  feveral  Soldiers  of  the  Regiment 
of  Carignan,  being  unprovided  againft  the  unfuflferable  cold 
of  the  Climate,  loft  their  Limbs,  and  even  their  Life  it  felf. 
Count  Frontenac  who  fucceeded  Mr.  Courfelle,^  perceiving  that 
the  Barbarians  had  the  advantage  of  the  Europeans,  as  to  the 
waging  of  War  in  that  Country;  upon  this  apprehenfion,  I 
fay,  he  declin'd  fuch  fruitlefs  Expeditions,  which  were  very 
chargeable  to  the  King,  and  us'd  all  his  efforts  to  difpofe  the 
Savages  to  a  fmcere  and  lafting  Peace.  This  judicious  Gov- 
ernor had  three  things  in  view ;  The  firft  was  to  incourage 
the  greateft  part  of  the  French  Inhabitants,  who  would  have 
abdicated  the  Colony,  and  return'd  to  France,  if  the  War  had 
continued.  His  fecond  Topick  was,  that  the  conclufion  of  a 
Peace  would  difpofe  an  infinity  of  People  to  marry,  and  to 
grub  up  the  Trees,  upon  which  the  Colony  would  be  better 
Peopled  and  inlarg'd.  The  third  Argument  that  diffuaded 
him  from  carrying  [25]  on  the  War,  was  a  defign  of  purfuing 
the  difcovery  of  the  Lakes,  and  of  the  Savages  that  live  upon 
their  banks,  in  order  to  fettle  a  Commerce  with  'em,  and  at  the 
fame  time  to  ingage  them  in  our  interefts,  by  good  Alliances, 
in  cafe  of  a  Rupture  with  the  Iroquefe.  Upon  the  confideration 
of  thefe  Reafons,  he  fent  fome  Canadans  by  way  of  a  formal 
Embaffy  to  the  Iroquefe  Villages,  in  order  to  acquaint  them, 

1  Louis  de  Baude,  count  de  Frontenac  (born  in  1620) ,  had  from  his  fifteenth  year 
seen  service  in  French  armies,  and  was  also  an  accomplished  courtier.  He  was  made 
lieutenant-general  of  New  France  in  1672,  and  while  the  most  able  of  the  governors, 
his  imperious  disposition  and  autocratic  temper  involved  him  in  many  disputes.  The 
opposition  became  so  great  that  he  was  recalled  in  1682.  Seven  years  later,  the 
peril  of  the  colony  was  such  that  Frontenac  was  again  summoned  to  defend  it.  This 
he  did  vigorously,  his  expedition  of  1696  crushing  the  Iroquois,  and  saving  Canada 
to  the  French.     He  died  at  Quebec  November  28,  1698.  —  Ed. 


to  iVor/^-America.  6i 

that  the  King  being  inform'd  that  a  groundlefs  War  was  car- 
ried on  againft  them,  had  fent  him  from  France  to  make  peace 
with  'em.  At  the  fame  time  the  Ambaffadors  had  orders  to 
ftipulate  all  the  advantages  they  could  obtain  with  reference  to 
the  Commerce.  The  Iroqiiefe  heard  this  Propofal  with  a  great 
deal  of  Satisfadion ;  for  Charles  II.  King  of  England^  had 
order'd  his  Governor  in  New-Tork  to  reprefent  to  'em,  that  if 
they  continu'd  to  wage  War  with  the  French^  they  were  ruin'd, 
and  that  they  would  find  themfelves  crufh'd  by  the  numerous 
Forces  that  were  ready  to  fail  from  France.  In  effed,  they 
promis'd  to  the  Ambaffadors  that  four  hundred  of  their  num- 
ber fhould  meet  Count  Frontenac,  attended  by  an  equal  number 
of  his  Men,  at  the  place  where  Fort  Frontenac  now  ftands. 
Accordingly,  fome  Months  after,  both  the  one  and  the  other 
met  at  the  place  appointed,  and  fo  a  Peace  was  concluded. 
Mr.  de  la  Salle  w^s  very  ferviceable  to  this  Governor,  in  giving 
him  good  and  feafonable  Advices,  which  I  cannot  now  enter 
upon,  being  oblig'd  to  make  fome  preparations  for  my  Voy- 
age.^ When  the  Campaign  is  over,  you  may  exped  to  hear 
from  me.     In  the  mean  time,  I  am, 

SIR, 

Tours,  &c. 


^  Lahontan  here  refers  to  Frontenac's  expedition  of  1673,  which  built  Fort  Fron- 
tenac, and  made  peace  with  the  Iroquois.  La  Salle  was  one  of  the  messengers  sent  to 
Onondaga  to  summon  the  chiefs  to  council.  See  Parkman,  La  Salle  (Boston,  1892), 
chap.  vi. 

Thomas  Dongan,  governor  of  New  York  (1682-88) ,  was  an  Irish  gentleman  who 
had  served  in  both  English  and  French  armies  in  Europe,  and  had  acted  as  lieutenant- 
governor  of  Tangiers,  He  attempted  to  thwart  the  plans  of  the  French,  to  control 
the  Iroquois  and  monopolize  the  trade  with  the  interior,  which  conduct  brought  upon 
him  reprimands  from  the  English  king,  then  subservient  to  the  crown  of  France. —  Ed. 


62  Some  New  Voyages 


LETTER    VI. 

Dated  at  Monreal  June  20.  1684. 

Being  an  ample  Defcription  of  the  Canows  made  of  Birch-barky  in 
which  the  Canadans  perform  all  their  Voyages;  with  an  account 
of  the  manner  in  which  they  are  made  and  manag'd. 

SIR, 

I  THOUGHT  to  have  fet  out  as  this  day ;  but  in  regard  that 
our  Complement  of  great  Canows  is  not  yet  brought  up, 
our  Voyage  is  put  off  for  two  days.  Having  fo  much  leifure 
time  upon  my  Hands,  I  have  a  mind  to  imploy  it  in  pre- 
fenting  you  with  a  fliort  view  of  thefe  flender  Contrivances  in 
which  the  Canadans  perform  all  their  Voyages :  And  this  will 
furnifh  you  with  an  Idaa  of  the  Voiture  of  this  Country.  I  faw 
but  now  above  an  hundred  Canows,  fome  great  and  fome 
httle;  but  confidering  that  the  former  are  only  proper  for 
Martial  Expeditions,  and  long  Voyages,  I  fhall  confine  my 
Defcription  to  that  fort.  Even  the  great  ones  are  of  different 
fizes;  for  they  run  from  ten  to  twenty  eight  Foot  long. 
Indeed  the  lead  of  all  hold  but  two  Perfons  fet  upon  their 
Breech,  as  in  a  Coffin ;  and  are  apt  to  over-fet,  if  the  Paffen- 
gers  move  to  one  fide  or  t'other  :  But  thofe  of  a  larger  fize  will 
eafily  afford  ftowage  for  fourteen  Perfons ;  tho'  they  are  com- 
monly mann'd  only  with  three  Men,  when  they  are  imploy'd 


to  North-\mtv\c^,  63 

in  tranfporting  Provifions  and  Merchandize ;  and  even  then 
they'll  carry  twenty  hundred  weight.  The  largeft  fort  are  fafe 
and  [27]  fteddy,  when  they  are  made  of  the  Bark  of  the  Birch- 
tree,  which  comes  off  with  hot  Water  in  the  Winter  time. 
The  greateft  Trees  afford  the  beft  Barks  for  Canows ;  but 
oftentimes  the  Bark  of  one  Tree  is  not  fufficient.  The  bot- 
tom of  the  Boat  is  all  of  one  piece,  to  which  the  fides  are  fo 
artfully  few'd  by  the  Savages,  that  the  whole  Boat  appears  as 
one  continu'd  Bark.  They  are  trimm'd  and  ftrengthn'd  with 
wicker  Wreaths,  and  ribs  of  Cedar- Wood,  which  are  almoft  as 
light  as  Cork ;  the  Wreaths  are  as  thick  as  a  Crown-piece ; 
but  the  Bark  has  the  thicknefs  of  two  Crowns,  and  the  Ribs 
are  as  thick  as  three.  On  the  two  fides  of  the  Boat,  there 
runs  from  one  end  to  the  other  two  principal  Head-bars,  in 
which  the  ends  of  the  Ribs  are  inchas'd,  and  in  which  the 
Spars  are  made  faft,  that  run  a-crofs  the  Boat  and  keep  it  com- 
pa6l.  Thefe  Boats  have  twenty  Inches  in  depth,  that  is,  from 
the  upper  edge  to  the  Platform  of  the  Ribs ;  their  length 
extends  to  twenty  eight  Foot,  and  the  width  at  the  middle 
Rib  is  computed  to  be  four  Foot  and  a  half.  They  are  very 
convenient  upon  the  account  of  their  extream  lightnefs,  and 
the  drawing  of  very  little  Water ;  but  at  the  fame  time  their 
brittle  and  tender  Fabrick,  is  an  Argument  of  an  equivalent 
inconveniency ;  for  if  they  do  but  touch  or  grate  upon  Stone 
or  Sand,  the  cracks  of  the  Bark  fly  open,  upon  which  the 
Water  gets  in,  and  fpoils  the  Provifions  and  Merchandize : 
Every  day  there  is  fome  new  chink  or  feam  to  be  gumm'd 
over.    At  Night   they  are   always  unloaded,  and   carried  on 


64  Some  New  Voyages 

fhoar  where  they  are  made  faft  with  Pegs,  left  the  Wind  fhould 
blow  'em  away:  For  they  are  fo  light,  that  two  Men  carry 
'em  upon  their  fhoulders  with  eafe.  This  conveniency  of 
lightnefs  and  eafie  carriage,  renders  'em  very  ferviceable  in 
the  Rivers  of  Canada,  which  are  full  of  Catara6ls,  Water-falls, 
and  Currents :  For  in  thefe  Rivers  we  are  obhg'd  either  to 
tranfport  [28]  'em  over-land  where  fuch  obftrudions  happen, 
or  elfe  to  tow  'em  along  where  the  Current  is  not  over-rapid, 
and  the  ftioar  is  accejflible.  Thefe  Boats  are  of  no  ufe  for  the 
Navigation  of  Lakes ;  for  the  Waves  would  fwallow  'em  up, 
if  they  could  not  reach  the  fhoar  when  a  wind  arifes.^  'Tis 
true,  the  Inhabitants  venture  in  'em  for  four  or  five  Leagues, 
from  one  Ifland  to  another ;  but  then  'tis  always  in  calm 
Weather,  and  nothing  is  made  ufe  of  but  Oars ;  for  befides 
the  rifque  of  being  over-fet,  the  Goods  are  in  danger  of  being 
dammag'd  by  the  Water,  efpecially  the  Furs  which  are  the 
moft  valuable  part  of  the  Cargoe.  When  the  feafon  ferves, 
they  carry  little  Sails ;  but  if  the  Wind  be  but  a  little  brisk, 
tho'  they  run  right  afore  it,  'tis  impoffible  to  make  any  ufe  of 
it  without  running  the  rifque  of  Ship-wrack.  If  their  courfe 
lies  diredlly  South,  they  cannot  put  up  fail  without  the  wind 
ftands  at  one  of  the  eight  points,  between  North-Weft  and 
North-Eaft ;  and  if  a  wind  happens  to  fpring  any  where  elfe, 
(unlefs  it  comes  from  the  Land  which  they  coaft  along)  they 


^  For  a  brief  description  of  the  process  of  making  a  birch  bark  canoe,  see 
McKenney,  Tour  of  the  Lakes  (Baltimore,  1827),  PP-  319.  320.  Lahontan  errs  in 
saying  that  these  craft  were  unfitted  for  the  navigation  of  the  lakes  ;  he  was  later  to 
learn  of  their  usefulness  on  those  waters.  —  Ed. 


to  North- AA-ntv\c2i.  65 

are  obllg'd  to  put  In  to  the  fhoar  with  all  pofTible  expedition, 
and  unload  the  Boat  out  of  hand,  till  fuch  time  as  a  calm 
returns. 

As  for  the  working  of  thefe  Boats,  the  Canow-Men  ply 
fometlmes  on  their  Knees,  namely,  when  they  run  down  the 
fmall  Water-falls  ;  fometlmes  ftanding,  when  they  ftem  a  Cur- 
rent by  fetting  the  Boat  along  with  Poles;  and  fometlmes 
fitting,  viz.  in  fmooth  and  ftagnating  water.  The  Oars  they 
make  ufe  of  are  made  of  Maple-wood,  and  their  form  is 
reprefented  In  the  annex'd  Cutt.  The  Blade  of  the  Oar  is 
twenty  Inches  long,  fix  Inches  broad,  and  four  Lines  thick: 
The  Handle  is  about  three  Foot  long,  and  as  big  as  a  Pigeons 
Egg.  When  they  have  occafion  to  run  up  agalnft  rapid  Cur- 
rents, they  make  ufe  of  Poles  made  of  Pine-wood;  and  the 
fetting  of  the  Boat  along  with  thefe,  [29]  is  what  they  call  Piqiier 
de  fond.  The  Canows  have  neither  Stern  nor  Prow,  for  they 
run  to  a  point  at  both  ends :  Neither  have  they  Keels,  Nails 
or  Pegs,  in  the  whole  Strudture.  The  Steerfman,  or  he  who 
Conns  the  Boat,  rows  without  interruption  as  well  as  the  reft. 
The  common  purchafe  of  fuch  a  Boat  is  eighty  Crowns ;  but 
it  do's  not  laft  above  five  or  fix  years. 

This  day  I  have  received  advice,  that  Mr.  de  la  Barre  has 
rals'd  the  Militia  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Quebec^  and  that 
the  Governor  of  this  Ifland  has  recelv'd  orders  to  have  that 
of  the  adjacent  Cantons  in  readinefs  to  march.     I  am, 

SIR, 

Tours ^  &c. 


66  Some  New  Voyages 


LETTER    VII. 

Dated  at  Monreal  Novemb.  2.  1684. 

Defcribing  the  Coiirfe  of  the  River  of  St.  Laurence, /row  Monreal 
to  the  firfi  great  Lake  0/ Canada;  with  the  Water-f alls  ^  Catara^ls, 
and  Navigation  of  that  River :  As  alfo  For/ Frontenac,  and  the 
Advantages  that  accrue  from  it.  Together  with  a  Circumftan- 
tial  account  of  the  Expedition  of  Mr.  de  la  Barre,  the  Governor- 
General^  againft  the  Iroquefe;  the  Speeches  he  made,  the  Replies 
he  received,  and  the  final  Accommodation  of  the  difference. 

SIR, 

THANK  God  I  have  finifh'd  this  Campaign,  and  am  now 
return'd  in  fafety  to  this  place.  To  prefent  you  with 
the  Hiftory  of  our  Campaign,  be  [30]  pleas'd  to  know  that 
in  two  or  three  days  after  the  date  of  my  laft,  I  imbarqu'd  on 
board  of  a  Canow  that  was  work'd  by  three  expert  Canow- 
Men.  Every  Canow  contain'd  two  Soldiers  ;  and  we  all  row'd 
up  againft  the  Current  of  the  River  till  we  arriv'd  at  Saut  de 
St.  Louis,  about  three  Leagues  above  this  Town,  which  is  a  little 
Water-fall,  but  fo  rapid,  that  our  Watermen  were  forc'd  to 
ftand  in  the  water  up  to  their  Middle,  in  order  to  drag  the 
Canows  againft  the  Stream  for  half  a  quarter  of  a  League.^ 


1  Sault  St.  Louis  was  the  name  originally  given  to  Lachine  Rapids,  just  above 
Montreal,  by  Champlain  (1611),  apparently  in  memory  of  a  lad  named  Louis  who 


to  North-Avntnc2i,  6y 

We  reimbarqu'd  above  this  Pafs,  and  row'd  about  twelve 
Leagues  up  the  River,  and  thro'  the  Lake  of  St.  Louis^  till  we 
arriv'd  at  a  place  call'd  the  Cafcades,  where  we  were  forc'd  to 
turn  out  and  carry  our  Boats  and  Baggage  over-land,  about 
half  a  quarter  of  a  League.  'Tis  true,  we  might  have  tow'd 
our  Boats  againft  the  Stream  in  this  place  with  fome  labour ; 
but  there  was  a  Catara6l  a  little  above  it,  which  they  call 
le  CataraBe  dn  Troii.  I  had  taken  up  a  notion  that  the  only 
difficulty  of  failing  up  the  River,  confifted  in  the  trouble  of 
Land-carriage ;  but  when  I  came  to  be  a  Spedlator  of  the 
matter,  I  found  that  the  ftemming  of  the  Currents  whether  in 
towing  of  the  Canows,  or  in  fetting  them  along  with  Poles, 
was  equally  laborious.  About  five  or  fix  Leagues  higher  we 
came  to  the  Water-falls  call'd  Sauts  des  Cedres,  and  du  Buiffon, 
where  we  were  forc'd  to  tranfport  our  Boats  five  hundred 
paces  over  Land.  Some  Leagues  above  that,  we  enter'd  the 
Lake  of  St.  Francis,  which  is  faid  to  be  twenty  Leagues  in 
Circumference;  and  having  crofs'd  it,  met  with  as  flirong  Cur- 
rents as  before,  particularly  at  a  fall  call'd  Long  Saui,  where 
we  had  recourfe  to  Land-carriage  for  half  a  League.     Then 

was  drowned  at  this  place.  The  head  of  navigation  upon  the  St.  Lawrence,  Cartler 
ascended  to  this  point  on  his  second  voyage  (1535),  and  explored  the  region  in  1541. 
The  name  "  Lachine  "  commemorates  the  derision  excited  among  the  enemies  of 
La  Salle;  upon  his  embarication  thither  for  the  West  (1669),  they  said  he  was  headed 
for  China  (La  Chine) ,  an  allusion  to  the  then  prevalent  notion  that  in  the  West  might 
be  found  a  transcontinental  waterway  which  should  prove  a  short-cut  to  China.  The 
term  "  La  Chine  "  was  equivalent  to  our  "  China-town."  The  Lachine  Rapids  are 
the  most  dangerous  on  the  St.  Lawrence,  and  are  now  avoided  by  the  Lachine  canal, 
eight  and  a  half  miles  long,  on  the  northern  side.  In  descending,  however,  specially- 
constructed  passenger  steamers  "  shoot  the  rapids,"  a  favorite  amusement  among  the 
people  of  Montreal.  —  Ed. 


68  Some  New  Voyages 

we  were  forc'd  to  drag  up  the  Boats  againft  the  rapid  Stream; 
and  after  a  great  deal  of  fatigue  came  at  laft  to  a  Pafs  call'd 
la  Galete^  from  whence  we  had  but  twenty  Leagues  failing  to 
Fort  Frontenac}  This  [31]  Pafs  was  the  laft  difficulty  we  had 
to  furmount ;  for  above  it  the  water  was  as  ftill  as  that  of  a 
Pool,  and  then  our  Watermen  ply'd  with  their  Oars  in  ftead 
of  Poles. 

The  Maringouins,  which  we  call  Midges^  are  unfufferably 
troublefom  in  all  the  Countries  of  Canada.  We  were  haunted 
with  fuch  clouds  of  'em,  that  we  thought  to  be  eat  up  ;  and 
fmoaking  being  the  only  Artifice  that  could  keep  'em  off,  the 
Remedy  was  worfe  than  the  Difeafe :  In  the  Night-time  the 
People  fhelter  themfelves  from  'em  in  Bowers  or  Arbours, 
made  after  the  following  manner.  They  drive  into  the  Ground 
Stakes  or  little  branches  of  Trees,  at  a  certain  diftance  one 
from  another,  fo  as  to  form  a  femicircular  Figure ;  in  which 
they  put  a  Quilt  and  Bedcloaths,  covering  it  above  with  a  large 
Sheet  that  falls  down  to  the  Ground  on  all  fides,  and  fo 
hinders  the  Infeds  to  enter. 

We  landed  at  Fort  Frontenac  after  twenty  days  failing  ;  and 
immediately  upon  our  arrival,  Mr.  Duta  our  Commander  in 
chief,  view'd  the  Fortifications  of  the  place,  and  three  large 
Barques  that  lay  at  Anchor  in  the  Port.^    We  repair'd  the 


^  Lahontan  here  describes  in  some  detail  the  passage  from  Montreal  to  Lake 
Ontario.  For  a  similar  description  in  reverse  order,  with  enumeration  of  the  rapids, 
see  Journal  of  Father  Bonnecamps  (1749),  in  Jesuit  Relations,  Ixix,  pp.  195,  197. 
The  Long  Sault  of  the  St.  Lawrence  is  now  paralleled  by  the  Cornwall  canal.  —  Ed. 

2  Captain  Du  Tas  (Tartre)  was  in  command  of  the  advance  guard  sent  to  convey 
provisions  to  Fort  Frontenac.     See  New  York  Colonial  Documents,  ix,  p.  234.    He 


to  North-h.vi\tnc2i.  69 

Fortifications  in  a  very  little  time,  and  fitted  up  the  three 
Barques.  This  Fort  was  a  Square,  confifting  of  large  Cur- 
tains flanked  with  four  little  Baftions ;  thefe  Flanks  had  but 
two  Battlements,  and  the  Walls  were  fo  low,  that  one  might 
eafily  climb  upon  'em  v/ithout  a  Ladder.  After  Mr.  de  la  Salle 
concluded  the  Peace  with  the  Iroqueje^  the  King  beftow'd  upon 
him  and  his  Heirs  the  property  of  this  place ;  but  he  was  fo 
negligent,  that  inftead  of  enriching  himfelf  by  the  Commerce 
it  might  have  aflForded,  he  was  confiderably  out  of  pocket 
upon  it.^  To  my  mind  this  Fort  is  fituated  very  advantage- 
oufly  for  a  Trade  with  the  five  Iroqiiefe  Nations :  For  their 
Villages  lye  in  the  Neighbourhood  of  the  Lake^  upon  which 
they  may  tranfport  their  Furs  in  Canows  with  more  [32]  eafe, 
than  they  can  carry  'em  over-land  to  New- For/;.  In  time  of 
War  I  take  it  to  be  indefenfible ;  for  the  Cataradls  and  Cur- 
rents of  the  River  are  fuch,  that  fifty  Iroqiiefe  may  there  ftop 


stopped  but  a  brief  time  in  the  colony,  but  again  brought  reinforcements  in  1690, 
when  Frontenac  sent  him  to  guard  the  St.  Lawrence.  He  served  in  the  English 
Channel  in  1692  ;  went  to  Hudson  Bay  (1695),  ^^^  ^^^  following  year  was  in  the 
campaign  in  Acadia. —  Ed. 

1  Courcelle  had  recommended  the  site  of  Fort  Frontenac  (Catarakouy)  on  his 
expedition  of  1671.  His  successor,  acting  upon  the  suggestion,  advanced  up  the  St. 
Lawrence  in  1673,  ^"^^  built  the  stockade  on  the  present  site  of  Kingston,  Ontario. 
Two  years  later.  La  Salle,  strongly  endorsed  by  Frontenac,  obtained  from  the  court  at 
Versailles  a  grant  of  the  fort  and  district  as  a  seignioiy.  Had  La  Salle  been  a  mere 
merchant,  he  would,  as  Lahontan  suggests,  have  made  his  fortune  therefrom.  Using  it 
merely  as  the  base  of  Western  exploration,  he  became  involved  in  financial  difficulties, 
and  upon  the  departure  of  his  patron  Frontenac  it  was  seized  by  his  enemies,  headed 
by  La  Barre  (1683).  Upon  the  order  of  the  king,  it  was  restored  the  following  year  to 
La  Salle's  lieutenant.  At  the  outbreak  of  Frontenac's  War  (1689),  Denonvillegave 
orders  for  the  destruction  of  this  fort ;  but  Frontenac  restored  it  in  1695,  and  the  French 
maintained  it  until  its  capture  by  the  British  in  1758. —  Ed. 


70  Some  New  Voyages 

five  hundred  French^  without  any  other  Arms  but  Stones.  Do 
but  confider,  Sir,  that  for  twenty  Leagues  together  the  River 
is  fo  rapid,  that  we  dare  not  fet  the  Canow  four  paces  off  the 
fhoar;  Befides,  Canada  being  nothing  but  a  Forreft,  as  I  inti- 
mated above,  'tis  impoffible  to  travel  there  without  falling 
every  foot  into  Ambufcades,  efpecially  upon  the  banks  of  this 
River,  which  are  lin'd  with  thick  Woods,  that  render  'em  inac- 
cefTible.  None  but  the  Savages  can  skip  from  Rock  to  Rock, 
and  fcour  thro'  the  Thickets,  as  if  'twere  an  open  Field.  If 
we  were  capable  of  fuch  Adventures,  we  might  march  five  or 
fix  hundred  Men  by  Land  to  guard  the  Canows  that  carry 
the  Provifions;  but  at  the  fame  time  'tis  to  be  confider'd,  that 
before  they  arriv'd  at  the  Fort,  they  would  confume  more 
Provifions  than  the  Canows  can  carry ;  Not  to  mention  that 
the  Iroqucfe  would  ftill  out-number  'em.  As  to  the  particulars 
relating  to  the  Fort,  I  fhall  take  notice  of  'em  v/hen  I  come  to 
give  a  general  defcription  of  Ntw-France. 

While  we  continued  at  Fort  Frontenac,  the  Iroquefe  who  live 
at  Ganeoujfe  and  Qiiente,  at  the  diftance  of  feven  or  eight 
Leagues  from  thence,^  threw  in  upon  us  Harts,  Roe-bucks, 
Turkeys  and  Fifh ;  in  exchange  for  Needles,  Knives,  Powder 


^  In  1668  several  Cayugas,  asking  for  a  missionary,  came  to  Montreal  from  a  new 
settlement  recently  made  on  Quinte  Bay,  on  the  north  shore  of  Lake  Ontario.  The 
Sulpitians  sent  out  tvvo  of  their  members,  who  maintained  the  mission  until  1673, 
when  Frontenac  granted  the  Recollects  the  chaplaincy  of  his  new  fort.  Hennepin 
was  stationed  here,  and  administered  to  the  mission  for  several  years.  See  Hennepin, 
Nenv  Disco-very  (Thwaites's  ed.,  Chicago,  1903),  pp.  47,  97.  The  mission  was 
abandoned  during  the  Iroquois  disturbances  just  preceding  the  outbreak  of  Frontenac's 
War  (or  about  1687). —  Ed. 


to  iVo/tZ'-America.  71 

and  Ball.  Towards  the  end  of  Auguft  Mr.  de  la  Bane  ioyn'd 
us ;  but  he  was  dangeroufly  ill  of  a  Feaver,  which  rag'd  in  like 
manner  among  moft  of  his  Militia ;  fo  that  only  our  three 
Companies  were  free  from  Sicknefs.  This  Feaver  was  of  the 
intermitting  kind  ;  and  the  convulfive  Motions,  Tremblings, 
and  frequency  of  the  Pulfe  that  attended  the  cold  Fit,  were  fo 
violent,  that  moft  of  our  fick  Men  dy'd  in  the  fecond  or  third 
Fit.  Their  Blood  was  [33]  of  a  blackifh  brown  colour,  and 
tainted  with  a  fort  of  ycllovv'ifh  Serum,  not  unlike  Pus  or  cor- 
rupt Matter.  Mr.  de  la  Barre's  Phyfician,  who  in  my  opinion 
knew  as  little  of  the  true  caufes  of  Feavers  as  Hippocrates  or 
Galen,  and  a  hundred  thoufand  befides  ;  this  mighty  Phyfician, 
I  fay,  pretending  to  trace  the  caufe  of  the  Feaver  I  now  fpeak 
of,  imputed  it  to  the  unfavourable  qualities  of  the  Air  and  the 
Aliment.  His  plea  was,  that  the  exceflive  heat  of  the  feafon, 
put  the  Vapours  or  Exhalations  into  an  over-rapid  Motion ; 
that  the  Air  was  fo  over-rarify'd,  that  we  did  not  fuck  in  a 
fufficient  quantity  of  it ;  that  the  fmall  quantity  we  did  receive 
was  loaded  with  Infedts  and  impure  Corpufculum's,  which  the 
fatal  neceflity  of  Refpiration  oblig'd  us  to  fwallow ;  and  that 
by  this  means  nature  was  put  into  diforder :  He  added,  that 
the  ufe  of  Brandy  and  fait  Meat  fower'd  the  Blood,  that  this 
fowernefs  occafion'd  a  fort  of  Coagulation  of  the  Chyle  and 
Blood,  that  the  Coagulation  hindered  it  to  circulate  thro'  the 
Heart  with  a  due  degree  of  Celerity ;  and  that  thereupon 
there  infued  an  extraordinary  Fermentation,  which  is  nothing 
elfe  but  a  Feaver.    But  after  all,  to  my  mind  this  Gentleman's 


72  Some  New  Voyages 

Syfteme  was  too  much  upon  the  Iroquefe  ftrain ;  for  at  that 
rate  the  DIftemper  muft  have  feiz'd  all  without  diftin6lion, 
whereas  neither  our  Soldiers  nor  the  feafon'd  Canadans  were 
troubled  with  it ;  for  it  raged  only  among  the  Militia,  who 
being  unacquainted  with  the  way  of  fetting  the  Boats  with 
Poles,  were  forc'd  at  every  turn  to  get  into  the  water  and  drag 
'em  up  againft  the  rapid  Stream :  Now,  the  waters  of  that 
Country  being  naturally  cold,  and  the  heat  being  excefTive,  the 
Blood  might  thereupon  freeze  by  way  of  Antiperiflafis^  and  fo 
occafion  the  Feaver  I  fpeak  of,  purfuant  to  the  common 
Maxim,  Oninis  repentina  mutatio  efl  perkiilofa^  i.  e.  All  fiidden 
changes  are  of  dangerous  Confequence. 

[34]  As  foon  as  Mr.  de  la  Barre  recover'd,  he  imbarqu'd 
in  order  to  continue  his  march;  tho'  he  might  have  eafily 
known,  that  after  halting  fourteen  or  fifteen  days  at  that  Fort, 
when  the  feafon  was  fo  far  advanc'd,  he  could  not  pretend  to 
compafs  the  end  of  his  Expedition.  We  row'd  Night  and  Day 
the  Weather  being  very  calm,  and  in  five  or  fix  days  came 
before  the  River  of  Famine^  where  we  were  forc'd  to  put  in 
upon  the  apprehenfion  of  a  Storm.^  Here  we  met  with  a 
Canow  that  Mr.  Dulhiit  had  fent  from  Mijfilimakinac,  with 
advice,  that  purfuant  to  orders  he  had  ingag'd  the  Htirons, 


1  Riviere  la  Famine  was  previously  identified  with  Onondaga  (Oswego)  River, 
but  later  investigations  have  proven  that  it  was  Salmon  River,  Oswego  County,  N.  Y. 
See  N.  Y,  Colonial  Documents,  ix,  p.  242.  The  region  was  not  named  for  lack  of 
supplies  in  La  Barre's  army,  but  from  some  previous  Indian  famine.  La  Barre 
encamped  on  the  northwest  side  of  the  river,  opposite  the  present  Port  Ontario.  See 
Hawley,  Early  Chapters  of  Cayuga  History  (Auburn,  1879). —  Ed. 


to  North-hmtnc2i,  73 

Outaoua'sy  and  fome  other  People,  to  joyn  his  Army;  in  which 

he    had    above    two    hundred    brave    *  Foreft 

Rangers.      Thefe  News  were  very  acceptable       ^^^  Coureurs 
,  ,        ,     ,      n  1  1       r  .         ,         de  Bois  in  the 

to  Mr.  de  la  Barre ;   but  at  the  fame  time  he     cr  , , 

was  very  much  perplexed ;  for  I'm  perfwaded 
he  repented  oftner  than  once,  of  his  entring  upon  an  Expedi- 
tion that  he  forefaw  would  prove  Succefslefs ;  and  to  aggra- 
vate the  danger  of  his  Enterprife,  the  Iroquefe  had  at  that 
time  an  opportunity  to  fall  upon  us.  In  fine,  after  a  mature 
confideration  of  the  Confequences,  and  of  the  Difficulties  that 
ftood  in  the  way,  he  fent  back  the  Canow  to  Mr.  Dulhut,  with 
orders  to  difmifs  the  Foreft  Rangers  and  Savages  immediately, 
where  ever  he  was,  and  by  all  means  to  avoid  the  approaching 
to  his  Troops.  By  good  luck  Mr.  Dulhut  had  not  yet  reach'd 
Niagara^  when  he  receiv'd  thefe  Orders ;  with  which  the 
Savages  that  accompany'd  him  were  fo  diffatisfied,  that  they 
threw  out  all  manner  of  Invedlives  againft  the  French  Nation.^ 
As  foon  as  Mr.  de  la  Barre  had  difpatch'd  this  Canow,  he 


^  Daniel  Greysolon  DuLuth  (duLhut),  "  king  of  coureurs  des  bois,"  had  been 
an  officer  in  the  French  army.  Coming  to  Canada  before  1674,  lie  set  out  four  years 
later  on  an  expedition  to  the  Sioux  country,  and  remained  in  the  Northwest  for  over 
twelve  years,  exploring,  trading,  and  securing  the  Indians  in  the  French  interest.  He 
was  so  powerful  that  his  services  were  sought  by  successive  governors.  He  brought 
an  Indian  force  to  the  aid  of  Denonville  in  1687  ;  and  in  1694  was  fighting  the  Iro- 
quois under  Frontenac.  Two  years  later  he  was  commandant  at  Fort  Frontenac, 
and  died  in  1710.  See  McLennan  "  Gentlemen  of  the  King's  Guard,"  in  Harper's 
Magazine,  Sept.,  1893  ;  and  "  Death  of  DuLuth  "  in  Roy.  Soc.  Proc,  2d  series,  ix, 
pp.  39-47.  The  Huron  and  Ottawa  who  composed  his  party  upon  the  occasion  here 
cited  by  Lahontan,  were  from  those  tribes  that  had  fled  from  the  Iroquois  attacks  and 
settled  under  French  protection  at  Fort  Mackinac. —  Ed. 


74  Some  New  Voyages 

fent  Mr.  le  Moine  to  the  Village  of  the  Onnontagues,  which  lay 
about  eighteen  Leagues  up  the  River.  This  Mr.  le  Moine 
was  a  Gentleman  of  Normandy^  and  highly  efleem'd  by  the 
Iroquefe,  who  [35]  call'd  him  Akouejfan,  i.  e.  the  Partridge}  His 
Orders  were,  to  indeavour  by  all  means  to  bring  along  with 
him  fome  of  the  old  ftanders  of  that  Nation ;  and  accordingly 
he  return'd  in  a  few  days,  accompany'd  with  one  of  their  moft 
confiderable  Grandees,  who  had  a  Train  of  thirty  young  War- 
riours,  and  was  diftinguifh'd  by  the  Title  of  the  Grangula} 
As  foon  as  he  debarqued,  Mr.  de  la  Barre  fent  him  a  Prefent 
of  Bread  and  Wine,  and  of  thirty  Salmon-Trouts,  which  they 
fifh'd  in  that  place  in  fuch  plenty,  that  they  brought  up  a 
hundred  at  one  caft  of  a  Net :  At  the  fame  time  he  gave  the 
Grandee  to  underftand,  that  he  congratulated  his  Arrival, 
and  would  be  glad  to  have  an  Interview  with  him  after  he  had 
refted  himfelf  for  fome  days.  You  muft  know  that  he  had 
us'd  the  precaution  of  fending  the  fick  back  to  the  Colony, 


^  Charles  Le  Moyne,  sieur  de  Longueuil,  was  a  native  of  Dieppe,  born  in  1624. 
He  came  to  Canada  in  1641,  and  after  four  years  among  the  Huron  with  the  Jesuits, 
settled  at  Montreal.  There  he  acted  for  many  years  as  interpreter  of  the  colony,  and 
captain  of  militia.  In  1655  he  was  captured  by  the  Iroquois,  who  were  so  impressed 
by  his  intrepidity  that  they  adopted  him  into  their  tribe,  and  sent  him  home  unharmed. 
The  value  of  his  ser^'ices  to  the  colony  was  so  great  that  he  was  ennobled  by  the  king 
(1668).  His  sons  distinguished  themselves  in  the  history  of  the  colony;  the  eldest, 
first  baron  of  Longueuil,  was  governor  of  Canada ;  Iberville  and  Bienville  were  the 
founders  of  Louisiana. —  Ed. 

2  By  this  Latinized  form  Lahontan  designates  the  Iroquois  chieftain  known  by 
the  French  as  La  Grande  Gueule  (Big  Mouth),  in  allusion  to  his  oratorical  ability. 
His  Indian  name  was  Otreouate,  and  he  belonged  to  the  Onondaga  tribe.  Although 
not  one  of  their  great  chiefs,  he  was  a  wily  diplom.atist,  and  owed  his  influence  to 
skill  in  oratory  and  powers  of  dissimulation.  For  his  signature  in  the  totems  of  his 
clan,  see  N.  Y.  Colon.  Docs.,  ix,  p.  386. —  Ed. 


to  N orth- hxntx\C2i,  75 

that  the  Iroquefe  might  not  perceive  the  weaknefs  of  his 
Forces;  and  to  favour  the  Stratagem,  Mr.  le  Moine  repre- 
fented  to  the  Grangida,  that  the  Body  of  the  Army  was  left 
behind  at  Fort  Frontenac,  and  that  the  Troops  he  faw  in  our 
Camp,  were  the  General's  Guards.  But  unhappily  one  of  the 
Iroquefe  that  had  a  fmattering  of  the  French  Tongue,  having 
ftroul'd  in  the  Night-time  towards  our  Tents,  over-heard  what 
we  faid,  and  fo  reveal'd  the  Secret.  Two  days  after  their 
arrival,  the  Grangula  gave  notice  to  Mr.  de  la  Barre  that  he 
was  ready  for  an  Interview;  and  accordingly  an  hour  being 
appointed,  the  whole  Company  appear'd  as  the  figure  repre- 
fents  it. 

The  Grangula  fat  on  the  Eaft  fide,  being  plac'd  at  the 
head  of  his  Men,  with  his  Pipe  in  his  Mouth,  and  the  great 
Calumet  of  Peace  before  him.  He  was  very  attentive  to  the 
following  Harangue,  pronounc'd  by  our  Interpreters ;  which 
you  cannot  well  underftand,  without  a  previous  explication  of 
the  Calumet^  and  the  CoUers  that  it  mentions. 

[36]  The  Calumet  of  Peace  is  made  of  certain  Stones,  or 
of  Marble,  whether  red,  black,  or  white.  The  Pipe  or  Stalk 
is  four  or  five  foot  long ;  the  body  of  the  Calumet  is  eight 
Inches  long,  and  the  Mouth  or  Head  in  which  the  Tobacco 
is  lodg'd,  is  three  Inches  in  length;  its  figure  approaches  to 
that  of  a  Hammer.  The  red  Calumets  are  moft  efteem'd. 
The  Savages  make  ufe  of  'em  for  Negotiations  and  State 
Affairs,  and  efpecially  in  Voyages ;  for  when  they  have  a 
Calumet  in  their  hand,  they  go  where  they  will  in  fafety.  The 
Calumet  is  trimm'd  with  yellow,  white,  and  p^reen  Feathers, 


76  Some  New  Voyages 

and  has  the  fame  effefl  among  the  Savages,  that  the  Flag  of 
friencKhip  has  amongft  us  ;  for  to  violate  the  Rights  of  this 
venerable  Pipe,  is  among  them  a  flaming  Crime,  that  will  draw 
down  mifchief  upon  their  Nations.^  As  for  the  Colters,  they 
are  certain  fwathes  of  two  or  three  Foot  in  length,  and  fix 
Inches  in  breadth ;  being  deck'd  with  little  Beads  made  of  a 
certain  fort  of  fhells  that  they  find  upon  the  Sea  fhoar,  between 
New-^ory^  and  Virginia.  Thefe  Beads  are  round,  and  as  thick 
as  a  little  Pea ;  but  they  are  twice  as  long  as  a  grain  of  Corn : 
Their  colour  is  either  blew  or  white  ;  and  they  are  bor'd  thro' 
jufl  like  Pearl,  being  run  after  the  fame  manner  upon  ftrings 
that  lye  fideways  one  to  another.  Without  the  intervention 
of  thefe  Coliers,  there's  no  bufinefs  to  be  negotiated  with  the 
Savages  ;  for  being  altogether  unacquainted  with  writing,  they 
make  ufe  of  them  for  Contrads  and  Obligations.  Sometimes 
they  keep  for  an  Age  the  Coliers  that  they  have  receiv'd  from 
their  Neighbours;  and  in  regard  that  every  Colier  has  its 
peculiar  Mark,  they  learn  from  the  old  Perfons,  the  Circum- 
ftances  of  the  time  and  place  in  which  they  were  deliver'd  ;  but 
after  that  age  is  over,  they  are  made  ufe  of  for  new  Treaties.^ 

iQn  the  uses  of  the  calumet,  see  Jesuit  Relations,  index.  The  red  stone  is 
known  as  "catlinite,"  from  the  artist  George  Catlin,  who  was  the  first  to  explore 
and  describe  the  quarries  at  Pipestone,  Minnesota.  —  Ed. 

2  These  "collars"  (so  called  by  the  French;  the  English  entitled  them  "  belts") 
were  made  of  wampum,  of  which  Lahontan  has  here  described  the  primitive  type  in 
the  form  of  shells.  Later  they  were  made  of  beads.  See  Jesuit  Relations,  viii,  note 
70  ;  also  Hale,  "  Indian  Wampum  Records  "  in  Popular  Science  Monthly,  February, 
1897.  Belts  of  wampum  were  always  used  in  the  negotiation  of  Indian  treaties  ;  they 
were  sent  with  envoys  as  credentials,  preserved  by  a  chief  as  the  ensign  of  his  authority, 
employed  in  ransom  and  atonement  for  crime,  and  also  as  ornament  and  in  place  of 
money.    The  English  term  was  "wampum";  that  of  the  French,  "  porcelain."— Ed. 


to  North- PiTCitriQ^.,  77 

[37]  ^^^-  '^^  1'^  Barre's  Harangue^  was  to  this  purpofe. 

'  The  King,  my  Mafter,  being  inform'd  that  the  five 
Iroqitefe  Nations  have  for  a  long  time  made  infradions 
upon  the  meafures  of  Peace,  order'd  me  to  come  hither  with 
a  Guard,  and  to  fend  Akoiiejfan  to  the  Canton  of  the  Onno- 
tagues,  in  order  to  an  Interview  with  their  principal  Leaders, 
in  the  Neighbourhood  of  my  Camp.  This  great  Monarch 
means,  that  you  and  I  fhould  fmoak  together  in  the  great 
Calumet  of  Peace,  with  the  Provifo,  that  you  ingage  in  the 
name  of  the  Tfonnontouans,  Goyoguans,  Onnotagiies,  OnnoyouteSy 
and  Agnies^  to  make  reparation  to  his  Subjeds,  and  to  be 
guilty  of  nothing  for  the  future,  that  may  occafion  a  fatal 
rupture. 

'  The  Tfonnontouans,  Goyogouans,  Onnotagues^  Onnoyoiites  and 
Agnies^  have  ftrip'd,  rob'd,  and  abus'd  all  the  Foreft-Rangers, 
that  travel'd  in  the  way  of  Trade  to  the  Country  of  the 
lUineJe^  of  the  Oumamis^  and  of  feveral  other  Nations,  who 
are  my  Matter's  Children.^  Now  this  ufage  being  in  high 
violation  of  the  Treaties  of  Peace  concluded  with  my  Prede- 
ceffor,  I  am  commanded  to  demand  Reparation,  and  at  the 


^  According  to  Parkman,  La  Barre  had  brought  this  about  by  giving  leave  to 
the  Iroquois  to  plunder  La  Salle's  canoes.  The  Indians  had  taken  advantage  of 
this  permission  to  seize  several  canoes  and  employes  of  the  governor  himself.  See 
Parkman,  Frontenac,  pp.  86,  87. 

The  Illinois  Indians,  of  Algonquian  stock,  were  encountered  by  the  French  in 
the  state  to  which  they  have  given  their  name.  La  Salle  had  founded  his  colony 
among  them,  only  to  have  it  raided  by  the  Iroquois.  See  Hennepin,  Ne-zv  Discovery 
(Thwaites's  ed.),  pp.  337-342.  The  Miami  (Oumamis)  were  first  encountered  by 
white  men  in  Wisconsin.  On  their  migrations  see  fris.  Hist.  Colts.,  xvi,  pp.  41,  99, 
127,  285,  361,  398. —  Ed. 


78  Some  New  Voyages 

'  fame  time  to  declare,  that  in  cafe  of  their  refufal  to  comply 
'with  my  demands,  or  of  relapfing  into  the  like  Robberies, 
'  War  is  pofitively  proclaim'd. 

This  Colier  makes  my  words  good. 

'  The  Warriours  of  thefe  five  Nations  have  introduc'd  the 
'  EngUpi  to  the  Lakes,  belonging  to  the  King  my  Mafter,  and 
'  into  the  Country  of  thofe  Nations  to  whom  my  Mafter  is  a 
'  Father :  This  they  have  done  with  a  defign  to  ruine  the 
'  Commerce  of  his  Subjeds,  and  to  oblige  thefe  Nations  to 
'  depart  from  their  due  Allegiance ;  notwithftanding  the  Re- 
'  monftrances  of  the  late  Governor  [38]  of  N^w-Tofk,  who  faw 
'  thro  the  danger  that  both  they  and  the  Engli/h  expos'd  them- 
'  felves  to.  At  prefent  I  am  willing  to  forget  thofe  A6lions ; 
'  but  if  ever  you  be  guilty  of  the  like  for  the  future,  I  have 
'  exprefs  orders  to  declare  War. 

This  Colier  warrants  my  Words. 

'  The  fame  Warriours  have  made  feveral  barbarous  Incur- 
'  fions  upon  the  Country  of  the  lUineJe,  and  the  Oumamis. 
'They  have  maffacred  Men,  Women,  and  Children;  they 
'  have  took,  bound,  and  carried  off  an  infinite  number  of  the 
'  Natives  of  thofe  Countries,  who  thought  themfelves  fecure 
'  in  their  Villages  in  a  time  of  Peace.  Thefe  People  are  my 
'  Matter's  Children,  and  therefore  muft  hereafter  ceafe  to  be 
'  your  Slaves.  I  charge  you  to  reftore  'em  to  their  Liberty, 
'  and  to  fend  'em  home  without  delay ;  for  if  the  five  Nations 


to  iVo/tZ?- America.  79 

'  refufe  to  comply  with  this  demand,  I  have  exprefs  orders  to 
'  declare  War. 

This  Colier  makes  my  words  good. 

'  This  is  all  I  had  to  fay  to  the  Grangiila,  whom  I  defire  to 
'  report  to  the  five  Nations,  this  Declaration,  that  my  Mafter 
'  commanded  me  to  make.  He  wifhes  they  had  not  oblig'd 
'  him  to  fend  a  potent  Army  to  the  Fort  of  *  Cat-  ^7-^^  French 
'  aracouy,  in  order  to  carry  on  a  War  that  will  call  it  Fort 
'  prove  fatal  to  them  :  And  he  will  be  very  much  Frontenac. 
'  troubled,  if  it  fo  falls  out,  that  this  Fort  which  is  a  work  of 
'  Peace,  muft  be  imploy'd  for  a  Prifon  to  your  Militia.  Thefe 
'  mifchiefs  ought  to  be  prevented  by  mutual  endeavours  :  The 
*  French  who  are  the  Brethren  and  Friends  of  the  five  Nations, 
'  will  never  difturb  their  Repofe  ;  provided  they  make  the  fatis- 
'  faction  I  now  demand,  and  prove  religious  obfervers  of  their 
'Treaties.  I  wifh  my  words  [39]  may  produce  the  defir'd 
'  eflfed ;  for  if  they  do  not,  I  am  oblig'd  to  joyn  the  Governor 
'  of  New-ror/^,  who  has  orders  from  the  King  his  Mafter,  to 
'  afTift  me  to  burn  the  five  Villages,  and  cut  you  off. 

This  Colier  confirms  my  word. 

'  While  Mr.  de  la  Barrels  Interpreter  pronounc'd  this 
Harangue,  the  Grangula  did  nothing  but  look'd  upon  the  end 
of  his  Pipe :  After  the  Speech  was  finifh'd  he  rofe,  and  having 
took  five  or  fix  turns  in  the  Ring  that  the  French  and  the 
Savages  made,  he  return'd  to  his  place,  and  {landing  upright 


8o  Some  New  Voyages 

fpoke  after  the  following  manner  to  the  General,  who  fat  in 

his  Chair  of  State. 

5fe— ,.    — .  ,     ,  ^  *  Onnontio,  I  honour  you,  and   all   the 

^  This  Title  they  .  '  -^       ' 

give  to  the  Gov-     '  Warriors  that  accompany  me  do  the  fame : 

ernor-General    of     '  Your  Interpreter  has  made  an  end  of  his 

Canada.  »  Difcourfe,  and  now  I  come  to  begin  mine. 

'  My  Voice  glides  to  your  Ear,  pray  liften  to  my  words. 

'  Onnontio^  in  fetting  out  from  Quebec^  you  muft  needs  have 

'  fancy'd  that  the  fcorching  Beams  of  the  Sun  had  burnt  down 

'  the   Forefts  which  render  our  Country  unaccefTible  to  the 

'  French ;  or  elfe  that  the  Inundations  of  the  Lake  had  fur- 

'  rounded  our  Cottages,  and  confin'd  us  as  Prifoners.     This 

'  certainly  was  your  thought;  and  it  could  be  nothing  elfe  but 

'  the  curiofity  of  feeing  a  burnt  or  drown'd   Country,  that 

'  mov'd  you  to  undertake  a  Journey  hither.     But  now  you 

'  have  an  opportunity  of  being  undeceiv'd,  for  I  and  my  war- 

'  like  Retinue  come  to  affure  you,  that  the  T jonontouam ^  Goyogo- 

'  uans^  Onnontagues,  Onnoyoutes  cindJgnies,  are  not  yet  deftroy'd. 

'  I  return  you  thanks  in  their  name,  for  bringing  into  their 

*  Country  the  Calumet  of  Peace,  that  your  Predeceffor  receiv'd 

'  from  their  hands.   At  the  fame  time  I  congratulate  your  [40] 

'Happinefs,   in   having   left   under  Ground 
"^ Burying  the  Axe     .  *  ^j^^   ^^^.      ^^^^   ^^^^   ^^^  ^^^^    ^^    ^^^^^ 

fignifies  Peace.  .  /•  t-^         .         t         n 

'  dy  d  with  the  blood  of  the  French.      I  muft 

'  tell  you,  Onnontio,  I  am  not  afleep,  my  Eyes  are  open ;  and 

'  the  Sun  that  vouchfafes  the  light,  gives  me  a  clear  view  of  a 

'  great  Captain  at  the  head  of  a  Troop  of  Soldiers,  who  fpeaks 

« as  if  he  were  afleep.    He  pretends  that  he  do's  not  approach 


/.v  ^ 


Stti'a^^s  rj/viii^tuiagreacSa770ttj  cinj Jtaiidm^  iiprtc//it    ' 


u±^<-i/ti>/v    ^f^irc/t  6nr^  tZ' it/l   ifjcatj. 


to  iVor^y^- America.  8i 

'  to  this  Lake  with  any  other  view,  than  to  fmoak  with  the 
^  Onnotagues  in  the  great  Calumet;  but  the  Grangida  knows 
'  better  things,  he  fees  plainly  that  the  Onnontio  mean'd  to 
'  knock  'em  on  the  Head,  if  the  French  Arms  had  not  been  fo 
'  much  weaken'd. 

'  I  perceive  that  the  Onnontio  raves  in  a  Camp  of  fick 
'  People,  whofe  lives  the  great  Spirit  has  fav'd  by  vifiting 
'  them  with  Infirmities.  Do  you  hear,  Onnontio^  our  Women 
*  had  took  up  their  Clubbs ;  and  the  Children  and  the  old 
'  Men,  had  vifited  your  Camp  with  their  Bows  and  Arrows, 
'  if  our  Warlike  Men  had  not  ftop'd  and  difarm'd  'em,  when 
^Jkoueffan  your  Ambaffadour  appear'd  before  my  Village. 
'  But  I  have  done,  I'll  talk  no  more  of  that. 

'  You  muft  know,  Onnontio,  we  have  robb'd  no  French-Men, 
'but  thofe  who  fupply'd  the  Iliinefe  and  the  Oiimamis  (our 
'Enemies)  with  Fufees,  with  Powder,  and  with  Ball:  Thefe 
'  indeed  we  took  care  of,  becaufe  fuch  Arms  might  have  coft 
'  us  our  life.  Our  Condud  in  that  point  is  of  a  piece  with 
'  that  of  the  Jefuits,  who  ftave  all  the  barrels  of  Brandy  that 
'  are  brought  to  our  Cantons,  left  the  People  getting  drunk 
'  (hould  knock  them  in  the  Head.  Our  Warriours  have  no 
'  Beavers  to  give  in  exchange  for  all  the  Arms  they  take  from 
'  the  French  ;  and  as  for  the  old  fuperannuated  People,  they 
'  do  not  think  of  bearing  Arms. 

[41]     This  Colier  comprehends  my  word. 

'  We  have  conducted  the  EngUPi  to  our  *  They  pretend 
'  *  Lakes,  in  order  to  traffick  with  the  Outaouas,  '"  ^'''  property 
*  and  the  Hurons ;   juft   as   the  Algonkins   con- 


82  Some  New  Voyages 

'  du6led  the  French  to  our  five  Cantons,  in  order  to  carry  on  a 

'  Commerce  that  the  Engli/h  lay  claim  to  as  their  Right.     We 

'  are  born  Freemen,  and  have  no  dependance  either  upon  the 

.[.^    ,      .    ,,       '' Onnontio  or  t\\t '\  Corlar}    We  have  a  power  to 
fCorlar  is  the  '^ 

Title  of  the     '  go  where  we  pleafe,  to  condu6l  who  we  will 

Governor  of    'to  the  places  we  refort  to,  and  to  buy  and  fell 

New-\orVi.         t  where  we  think  fit.      If  your  Allies  are  your 

'  Slaves  or  Children,  you  may  e'en  treat  'em  as  fuch,  and  rob 

'  'em  of  the  liberty  of  entertaining  any  other  Nation  but  your 

'  own. 

This  Colier  contains  my  word. 

'  We  fell  upon  the  Illineje  and  the  Oumamis,  becaufe  they 

'  cut  down  the  trees  of  Peace  that  ferv'd  for  limits  or  bound- 

'  aries  to  our  Frontiers.     They  came  to  hunt  Beavers  upon 

'  our  Lands ;  and  contrary  to  the  cuftom  of  all  the  Savages, 

'  have  carried  off  whole  Stocks,  ||both  Male  and 

o  ,  ■  '  Female.     They  have  ingag'd  the  Chaouanons 

Savages,    tts  a  _  -^  . 

capital    Crime     '  ^^  their  intereft,  and  entertain'd  'em  in  their 

to    dejlroy    all     '  Country.^    They  fupply'd 'em  with  Fire-Arms, 

the  Beavers  of     i  after  the  concerting  of  ill  defigns  againft  us. 

'  We  have  done  lefs  than  the  Engli/h  and  the 


1  The  significance  of  the  word  Onontio,  by  which  the  Iroquois  designated  the 
governor  of  Canada,  was  said  to  be  "  great  "  or  "  beautiful  mountain,"  and  to  have 
been  a  translation  of  the  name  of  the  second  governor,  Montmagny.  Corlaer,  the 
Indian  name  for  the  governor  of  New  York,  was  derived  from  Van  Curler,  an  early 
Dutch  trader  who  had  much  influence  among  the  Mohawk. —  Ed. 

2 The  Shawnee  (French  Chaouanon)  were  an  Algonquian  tribe,  concerning 
whose  migrations  and  relations  there  has  been  considerable  controversy.  La  Salle 
found  them  in  the  Ohio  country,  where  in  the  eighteenth  century  they  were  a  terror 
to  the  Western  settlers  of  the  United  States.  See  Jesuit  Relations,  xlvii,  p.  316  ;  Ixi, 
p.  249  ;  If  is.  Hist.  Colls.,  xvi,  pp.  48,  364;  xvii,  index.  —  Ed. 


to  North-Kmtvicdi..  83 

'  French,  who  without  any  right,  have  ufurp'd  the  Grounds 
'  they  are  now  poffefs'd  of;  and  of  which  they  have  diflodg'd 

*  feveral  Nations,  in  order  to  make  way  for  their  building  of 
'  Cities,  Villages,  and  Forts. 

[42]     This  Colier  contains  my  word. 

'  I  give  you  to  know,  Onnontio^  that  my  Voice  is  the  Voice 
'  of  the  five  Iroquefe  Cantons.  This  is  their  Anfwer,  pray 
'  incline  your  Ear,  and  liften  to  v/hat  they  reprefent. 

'  The  Tfonontouans,  Goyogouans,  Onnontagues,  Onnoyoutes,  and 

*■  Agnies  declare,  that   they  interr'd   *  the 

.  ^'  Interring  the  Axe, 

Axe  at  Cataracouy,  m  the  prefence  of  your     ^^,„-^^^  ^^^  ^^^;„^  ^y 

*  Precedeffor,  in  the  very  center  of  the  Fort;  a  Peace;  and  the  dig- 
'  and  planted  the  Tree  of  Peace  in  the  fame  gingofit  up  imports  a 
'  place,  that  it  might  be  carefully  preferv'd ;  ^^^^«^^^'<'«  "/  ^^^• 
'  that  'twas  then  ftipulated,  that  the  Fort  fhould  be  us'd  as  a 
'  place  of  retreat  for  Merchants,  and  not  a  refuge  for  Soldiers  ; 
'  and  that  inftead  of  Arms  and  Ammunition,  it  fhould  be  made 
'  a  Receptacle  of  only  Beaver-Skins,  and  Merchandize  Goods, 
'  Be  it  known  to  you,  Onnontio,  that  for  the  future  you  ought 
'  to  take  care,  that  fo  great  a  number  of  Martial-Men  as  I  now 

*  fee,  being  fhut  up  in  fo  fmall  a  Fort,  do  not  flifle  and  choak 
'  the  Tree  of  Peace.  Since  it  took  Root  fo  eafily,  it  muft 
'  needs  be  of  pernicious  confequence  to  ftop  its  growth,  and 
'  hinder  it  to  fhade  both  your  Country  and  ours  with  its 
'  Leaves.  I  do  affure  you,  in  the  name  of  the  five  Nations, 
'  that  our  Warriors  fhall  dance  the  Calumet  Dance  under  its 


84  Some  New  Voyages 

'branches;  that  they  fhall  reft  in  Tran- 
t  This  Phrafe  Jis[ni-      .        .,.  ^     •      \  -n.  x  1      mi 

r    ,      ■      in  quuity  upon  their  tMatts,  and  will  never 

jies  keeping  the  reace.  . 

'  dig  up  the  Axe  to  cut  down  the  Tree  of 
'  Peace  ;  till  fuch  time  as  the  Onnontio  and  the  Corlar^  do  either 
'joyntly  or  feparately  oflFer  to  invade  the  Country,  that  the 
'  great  Spirit  has  difpos'd  of  in  the  favour  of  our  Anceftors. 

[43]  This  Colier  contains  my  word ;  and  the  other  comprehends 
the  power  granted  to  me  by  the  five  Nations. 

Then  the  Grangula  addrefs'd  himfelf  to  Mr.  le  Moine,  and 
fpoke  to  this  purpofe. 

^Jkoueffan,  take  Heart,  you  are  a  Man  of  Senfe  ;  fpeak  and 
'  explain  my  meaning  ;  be  fure  you  forget  nothing,  but  declare 
'  all  that  thy  Brethren  and  thy  Friends  reprefent  to  thy  chief 
'  Onnontioy  by  the  voice  of  the  Grangula,  who  pays  you  all 
'  Honour  and  Refped,  and  invites  you  to  accept  of  this  Pre- 
'  fent  of  Beavers,  and  to  affift  at  his  Feaft  immediately. 

'  This  other  Prefent  of  Beavers  is  fent  by  the  five  Nations 
'  to  the  Onnontio. 

As  foon  as  the  Grangula  had  done,  Mr.  le  Maine  and  the 
Jefuits  that  were  prefent,  explain'd  his  anfwer  to  Mr.  de  la 
Barre,^  who  thereupon  retir'd  to  his  Tent  and  ftorm'd  and 
blufter'd,  till  fome  body  came  and  reprefented  to  him,  that, 
Iroca  Progenies  nefcit  habere  modos,  i.  e.  The  Iroquefe  are  always 
upon  extreams.     The  Gratigula  danc'd  after  the  Iroquefe  manner, 


^  Father  Jacques  Bruyas  was  interpreter  upon  this  occasion.     See  ante,  p.  56, 
note  I. —  Ed. 


to  iVor^^-America.  85 

by  way  of  prelude  to  his  Entertainment ;  after  which  he 
regal'd  feveral  of  the  French.  Two  days  after  he  and  his 
Martial-Retinue  return'd  to  their  own  Country,  and  our  Army 
fet  out  for  Monreal.  As  foon  as  the  General  was  on  board, 
together  with  the  few  healthy  Men  that  remain'd,  the  Canows 
were  difpers'd,  for  the  Militia  ftraggled  here  and  there,  and 
every  one  made  the  beft  of  his  way  home.  Our  three  Com- 
panies indeed  kept  together,  becaufe  all  of  us,  both  Officers 
and  Soldiers,  were  carried  in  flat-bottom'd  Boats,  made  of 
Deal  on  purpofe  for  our  ufe.  However,  I  could  have  wifh'd 
to  have  run  down  the  falls  and  Catarads  [44]  in  the  fame 
Canow  that  brought  me  up,  for  every  body  thought  we 
fhould  have  been  caft  away  at  thefe  Paffes,  which  are  full  of 
Eddy's  and  Rocks ;  and  'twas  never  heard  before,  that  fuch 
Precipices  were  pafs'd  with  Deal  Boats  either  upwards  or 
downwards.  But  we  were  forc'd  to  run  all  hazards,  and  had 
certainly  been  fwallow'd  up  in  thofe  Mountains  of  Water,  if 
we  had  not  oblig'd  feveral  Canows  to  fhoot  the  Cataradls  at 
the  head  of  our  Boats,  in  order  to  fhew  us  the  way ;  at  the 
fame  time  we  had  prepar'd  our  Soldiers  for  rowing,  and 
fhieving  upon  occafion.  Do  but  confider.  Sir,  that  the  Cur- 
rents run  as  faft  as  a  Cannon  Ball;  and  that  one  falfe  ftroak 
of  the  Oar,  would  have  run  us  unavoidably  upon  the  Rocks  ; 
for  we  are  oblig'd  to  fteer  a  Zig-zag  courfe  purfuant  to  the 
thread  of  the  Stream,  which  has  fifty  windings.  The  Boats 
which  are  loaded  are  fometimes  loft  in  thofe  places.  But  after 
all,  tho'  the  rifque  we  run  be  very  great,  yet  by  way  of  Com- 


86  Some  New  Voyages 

penfation,  one  has  the  fatisfadion  of  running  a  great  way  in  a 
little  time ;  for  we  run  from  Galete  to  this  Town  in  two  days 
time,  notwithftanding  that  we  crofs'd  the  two  ftagnating  Lakes 
I  took  notice  of  before. 

As  foon  as  we  landed,  we  receiv'd  advice  that  the  Chevalier 
de  CaUieres  was  come  to  fupply  the  room  of  Mr.  Pe?'rot,  the 
Governor  of  this  place.^  Mr.  Perrot  has  had  feveral  fcuffies 
with  Mr.  de  Frontenac,  and  Mr.  de  la  Barre  ;  of  which  you  may 
exped:  a  farther  account,  when  I  am  better  inform'd.  All  the 
World  blames  our  General  for  his  bad  Succefs :  'Tis  talk'd 
publickly,  that  his  only  defign  was  to  cover  the  fending  of 
feveral  Canows  to  traffick  with  the  Savages  in  thofe  Lakes  for 
Beaver-Skins.  The  People  here  are  very  bufie  in  wafting  over 
to  Court  a  thoufand  Calumnies  againft  him  ;  both  the  Clergy 
and  the  Gentlemen  of  the  long  Robe,  write  to  his  difadvantage. 
Tho'  after  all,  the  whole  charge  is  [45]  f alfe ;  for  the  poor 
Man  could  do  no  more  than  he  did.^  Juil  now,  I  was  inform'd 
that  Mr.  Hainaiit,  Mr.  Montortier,  and  Mr.  Durivau,  three  Cap- 
tains of  Ships,  are  arriv'd  at  Quebec,  v/ith  a  defign  to  pafs  the 
Winter  there,  and  to  affift  him  as  Counfellors ;  and  that  the 


^  Louis  Hector,  sieur  de  Callieres-Bonnevue  was  born  in  1646  or  1647,  and  early 
adopted  the  profession  of  arms.  Coming  to  Canada  in  1684  as  governor  of  Montreal, 
he  soon  proved  himself  an  important  factor  in  the  defense  of  the  colony.  He  ably 
seconded  the  measures  of  Frontenac,  and  upon  his  death  (1698)  was  appointed  his 
successor.  He  brought  Frontenac's  war  with  the  Iroquois  to  a  successful  issue,  and 
made  a  peace  (1701)  with  this  redoubtable  foe.     His  death  occurred  in  1703.— Ed. 

2  For  La  Barre's  own  account  of  the  expedition,  see  N.  Y.  Colon.  Docs.,  ix,  pp. 
239-243.  The  account  of  his  detractors,  headed  by  the  intendant  Meules,  follows, 
pp.  244-248. ^Ed. 


to  No7'th-Kvc).^nc2i,  87 

laft  of  thefe  three  has  brought  with  him  an  Independent  Com- 
pany, to  be  commanded  by  himfelf.^ 

I  fhall  have  no  opportunity  of  writing  again  before  the 
next  Spring ;  for  the  laft  Ships  that  are  to  return  for  France 
this  year,  are  now  ready  to  fail. 

/  am^  SIR,  Yours,  &c. 


1  These  officers,  whose  names  are  given,  Desnots,  Montortie,  and  Du  Rivau  Huet, 
came  out  in  charge  of  reinforcements  in  the  autumn  of  1684,  but  were  permitted  to 
return  the  following  year.  See  N.  Y.  Colon,  Docs.,  ix,  p.  250;  Canadian  Archives , 
supplement,  1899,  pp.  269,  270. — Ed. 


88  Some  New  Voyages 


LETTER    VIII. 

Dated  at  Monreal,  June  28.  1685. 

Reprefenting  the  Fortifications  of  Monreal,  and  the  indifcreet  Zeal 
of  the  Priefls,  who  a?'e  Lords  of  that  Town :  With  a  Defcrip- 
tion  of  Chambli,  and  of  the  Commerce  of  the  Savages  upon  the 
great  Lakes. 

SIR, 

I  HAVE  juft  receiv'd  yours,  by  a  fmall  Veffel  of  Bourdeaux 
loaded  with  Wine;  which  is  the  firft  that  came  to  Quebec 
this  Year.  I  am  mightily  pleas'd  to  hear  that  the  King  has 
granted  to  Mr.  de  la  Salle  four  Ships,  to  go  upon  the  Dif- 
covery  of  the  Mouth  of  the  Miffifipi;  and  cannot  but  admire 
your  Curiofity,  in  defiring  to  know  the  Occurrences  of  this 
Place,  and  how  I  fpent  my  time  in  the  Winter. 

Mr.  de  CalUeres  was  no  fooner  poffefs'd  of  his  Government, 
than  he  order'd  all  the  Inhabitants  of  this  Town,  and  of  the 
adjacent  Country,  to  cut  down  and  bring  in  great  Stakes, 
of  fifteen  Foot  in  length,  [46]  to  fortifie  the  Town.  During 
the  Winter,  thefe  Orders  were  purfued  with  fo  much  Applica- 
tion, that  all  things  are  now  ready  for  making  the  Inclofure ; 
in  which  five  or  fix  hundred  Men  are  to  be  imploy'd.  I  fpent 
part  of  the  Winter  in  Hunting  with  the  Algonkins,  in  order  to 
a  more  perfed  knowledge  of  their  Language ;  and  the  reft  I 


to  A^o;t^-America.  89 

fpent  in  this  Place,  with  a  great  deal  of  uneafinefs :  for,  here 
we  cannot  enjoy  our  felves,  either  at  Play,  or  in  vifiting  the 
Ladies,  but  'tis  prefently  carried  to  the  Curate's  ears,  who 
takes  publick  notice  of  it  in  the  Pulpit.  His  Zeal  goes  fo  far, 
as  even  to  name  the  Perfons  :  and  fince  he  refufes  the  Sacra- 
ment of  the  Holy  Supper  to  Ladies  of  Quality,  upon  the  moft 
(lender  Pretences,  you  may  eafily  guefs  at  the  other  fl:eps  of 
his  Indefcretion,  You  cannot  imagine  to  what  a  pitch  thefe 
Ecclefiaftical  Lords  have  fcrew'd  their  Authority :  They 
excommunicate  all  the  Masks,  and  wherever  they  fpy  'em, 
they  run  after  'em  to  uncover  their  Faces,  and  abufe  'em  in  a 
reproachful  manner :  In  fine,  they  have  a  more  watchful  eye 
over  the  Condud  of  the  Girls  and  married  Women,  than 
their  Fathers  and  Husbands  have.  They  cry  out  againft 
thofe  that  do  not  receive  the  Sacrament  once  a  Month ;  and 
at  Eafter  they  oblige  all  forts  of  Perfons  to  give  in  Bills  to 
their  Confeffors.  They  prohibit  and  burn  all  the  Books  that 
treat  of  any  other  Subje6l  but  Devotion.  When  I  think  of 
this  Tyranny,  I  cannot  but  be  inrag'd  at  the  impertinent  Zeal 
of  the  Curate  of  this  City.  This  inhumane  Fellow  came  one 
day  to  my  Lodging,  and  finding  the  Romance  of  the  Adven- 
tures of  Petroniiis  upon  my  Table,  he  fell  upon  it  with  an 
unimaginable  fury,  and  tore  out  almoft  all  the  Leaves.  This 
Book  I  valued  more  than  my  Life,  becaufe  'twas  not  caftrated  ; 
and  indeed  I  was  fo  provok'd  when  I  faw  it  all  in  wrack,  that 
if  my  Landlord  had  not  held  me,  I  had  gone  immediately  to 
that  turbulent  Paftor's  [47]  Houfe,  and  would  have  pluck'd 
out  the  Hairs  of  his  Beard  with  as  little  mercy  as  he  did  the 


90  Some  New  Voyages 

Leaves  of  my  Book.  Thefe  Animals  cannot  content  them- 
felves  with  the  ftudying  of  Mens  A6lions,  but  they  muft 
likewife  dive  into  their  Thoughts.  By  this  Sketch,  Sir,  you 
may  judge  what  a  pleafant  Life  we  lead  here. 

The  30th  of  the  laft  March  the  Ice  melted ;  and  the  River 
being  then  open,  I  was  fent  with  a  fmall  Detachment  to  Cbam- 
bli:  for  commonly  the  Sun  refumes  its  Vigour  here  much 
about  that  time.  Chambli  ftands  on  the  brink  of  a  Bafin, 
about  five  or  fix  Leagues  off  this  Place :  That  Bafin  is  two 
Leagues  in  Circumference,  and  receives  the  Lake  of  Cham- 
plain  by  a  Water-fall  that  is  a  League  and  a  half  in  length ; 
out  of  which  there  arifes  a  River  that  difembogues  at  Sorel 
into  the  River  of  St.  Laurence^  as  I  intimated  above  in  my 
fourth  Letter.  In  former  times  this  Place  had  a  great  Trade 
in  Beaver-skins,  which  is  now  decay'd :  for  the  Soccokis,  the 
Mahingans,  and  the  Openangos,  us'd  formerly  to  refort  thither 
in  {hoals,  to  exchange  their  Furs  for  other  Goods ;  but  at 
prefent  they  are  retir'd  to  the  Englifli  Colonies,  to  avoid  the 
purfuit  of  the  Iroquefe}  The  Champlain  Lake,  which  lies 
above  that  Water-fall,  is  eighty  Leagues  in  circumference.  At 
the  end  of  this  Lake  we  met  with  another,  call'd  S.  Sacrement, 
by  which  one  may  go  very  eafily  to  New-York^  there  being  but 


1  These  were  tribes  who  had  formerly  occupied  Acadia  and  Maine,  and  had 
migrated  with  the  Abenaki  to  the  St.  Lawrence.  The  Sokoki  (Soccoki)  were  Abenaki 
whose  habitat  was  the  Saco  River,  and  whose  enmity  with  the  Mohawk  was  of  long 
standing.  One  of  this  tribe,  Squanto,  led  the  attack  on  the  English  settlement  at  Saco, 
Sept.  18,  1675.  The  Openangoes  were  the  Algonquian  of  New  Brunswick,  called 
by  the  English  Quoddy  Indians.  The  Mahican  (Mohegan)  was  a  numerous  Algon- 
quian tribe,  whose  first  habitat  was  the  valley  of  the  Hudson,  later  that  of  the  Con- 
necticut.    The  French  usually  called  them  Loups  (Wolves).  —  Ed. 


to  North'\vcitnc2i,  91 

a  Land-carriage  of  two  Leagues  from  thence  to  the  River 
Du  Fer,  which  falls  into  the  Manathe}  While  I  was  at  Cham- 
bli,  I  faw  two  Canows  loaded  with  Beaver-skins  pafs  privately 
by  that  way ;  and  'tv/as  thought  they  were  fent  thither  by  Mr. 
de  la  Barre.  This  fmuggling  way  of  Trade  is  exprefly  pro- 
hibited :  for  they  are  oblig'd  to  carry  thefe  Skins  before  the 
Office  of  the  Company,  where  they  are  rated  at  an  Hundred 
and  60  per  Cent,  lefs  than  the  Englifh  buy  'em  at  in  their  Colo- 
nies.2  But  the  little  Fort  that  ftands  at  the  bottom  [48]  of 
the  Water-fall,  upon  the  brink  of  the  Bafin  of  Chambli,  being 
only  fingle  Pallifadoes,  it  cannot  hinder  People  to  pafs  that 
way;  efpecially  confidering  that  the  Profpedl,  of  fo  great  a 
profit,  renders  the  Paffengers  the  more  daring.  The  Inhab- 
itants of  the  adjacent  Villages  are  very  much  expos'd  to  the 
Incurfions  of  the  Iroqueje  in  time  of  War.  Notwithftanding 
the  weaknefs  of  the  Fort,  I  continued  in  that  place  a  Month 
and  a  half,  and  then  I  return'd  hither,  where  Mr.  de  la  Barre 
arriv'd  fome  days  after;  being  accompany'd  with  Mr.  Hemiaut, 


^  The  Indian  name  for  Lake  George  was  Andiatarocte,  "  where  the  lake  is  shut 
in."  The  Jesuit  missionary  Jogues  named  it  (1646)  Lac  du  St.  Sacrement.  In  1755 
Sir  William  Johnson  changed  the  name  in  honor  of  the  English  king.  The  River 
Du  Fer  is  the  north  branch  of  the  Hudson  which  falls  into  the  "  Manathe,"  i.  e.  the 
river  of  Manhattan.  —  Ed. 

2  The  Compagnie  des  Indes  Occidentales  was  created  May  24,  1664,  and  given 
the  monopoly  of  the  fur-trade  of  Canada.  Upon  the  protestation  of  the  colony's  mer- 
chants, the  company  relinquished  the  monopoly  in  favor  of  the  right  to  levy  a  duty  of 
one-fourth  of  the  beaver  skins  and  one-tenth  of  the  moose  skins  imported  from  Canada. 
The  company  was  dissolved  in  1674,  ^^^  the  king  retained  the  duties  in  the  same 
form,  and  farmed  them  out  for  350,000  livres.  The  farmer  formed  a  company,  some- 
times spoken  of  as  the  "  Company  of  Domain."  This  is  the  one  to  which  Lahontan 
here  refers.     The  price  paid  for  beaver  was  regulated  by  edict.  —  Ed, 


92  Some  New  Voyages 

Mr.  Montortier,  and  Mr.  du  Rivau.  Much  about  the  fame  day 
there  arrlv'd  25  or  30  Canows,  belonging  to  the  Coureurs  de 
BoiSy  being  homeward  bound  from  the  great  Lakes,  and  laden 
with  Beaver-skins.  The  Cargo  of  each  Canow  amounted  to 
40  Packs,  each  of  which  weighs  50  pound,  and  will  fetch  50 
Crowns  at  the  Farmers  Office.  Thefe  Canows  were  follow'd 
by  50  more  of  the  Outaouas  and  Htirons,  who  come  down  every 
Year  to  the  Colony,  in  order  to  make  a  better  Market  than 
they  can  do  in  their  own  Country  of  Miffilimakinac,  which  lies 
on  the  Banks  of  the  Lake  of  Hurons^  at  the  Mouth  of  the 
Lake  of  the  lUinefe}    Their  way  of  Trading  is  as  follows. 

Upon  their  firft  Arrival,  they  incamp  at  the  diftance  of  five 
or  fix  hundred  Paces  from  the  Town.  The  next  day  is  fpent 
in  ranging  their  Canows,  unloading  their  Goods,  and  pitching 
their  Tents,  which  are  made  of  Birch  Bark.  The  next  day 
after,  they  demand  Audience  of  the  Governour  General; 
which  is  granted  'em  that  fame  day  in  a  publick  place.  Upon 
this  Occafion,  each  Nation  makes  a  Ring  for  it  felf ;  the  Sav- 
ages fit  upon  the  Ground  with  their  Pipes  in  their  Mouths, 
and  the  Governour  Is  feated  in  an  arm'd  Chair ;  after  which, 
there  fl:arts  up  an  Orator  or  Speaker  from  one  of  thefe 
Nations,  who  makes  an  Harangue,  importing,  '  That  his 
*  Brethren  are  come  to  vifit  the  Governour  general,  and  to 
'  renew  [49]  with  him  their  wonted  Friendfhip :  That  their 
'  chief  View  is,  to  promote  the  Intereft  of  the  French^  fome  of 

^  For  the  early  history  of  Mackinac  (Missilimaicinac)  see  Thwaites,  "  Story  of 
Mackinac,"  in  Hoiu  George  Rogers  Clark  Won  the  Northivest  (Chicago,  1903). 
Illinois  Lake  (Lac  d'  liinois)  was  an  early  name  for  Lake  Michigan.  — Ed. 


to  North- A.vi\tv\c2i,  93 

'  whom  being  unacquainted  with  the  way  of  Traffick,  and 
'  being  too  weak  for  the  tranfporting  of  Goods  from  the 
'  Lakes,  would  be  unable  to  deal  in  Beaver-skins,  if  his  Breth- 
'  ren  did  not  come  in  perfon  to  deal  with  'em  in  their  own 
'  Colonies :  That  they  know  very  well  how  acceptable  their 
'  Arrival  is  to  the  Inhabitants  of  Monreal,  in  regard  of  the 
'  Advantage  they  reap  by  it :  That  in  regard  the  Beaver-skins 
'  are  much  valued  in  France,  and  the  French  Goods  given  in 
'  exchange  are  of  an  inconfiderable  Value,  they  mean  to  give 
'  the  French  fufficient  proof  of  their  readinefs  to  furnifh  'em 
'  with  what  they  defire  fo  earneftly :  That  by  way  of  prepara- 
'  tion  for  another  Years  Cargo,  they  are  come  to  take  in 
'  Exchange,  Fufees,  Powder,  and  Ball,  in  order  to  hunt  great 
'  numbers  of  Beavers,  or  to  gall  the  Iroquefe,  in  cafe  they  offer 
•to  difturb  the  French  Settlements:  And,  in  fine.  That  in  con- 
'  formation  of  their  Words,  they  throw  a  Purcelain  CoHer 
'  with  fome  Beaver-skins  to  the  Kitchi-Okima  (fo  they  call  the 
'  Governour-General)  whofe  Protedion  they  lay  claim  to  in 
'  cafe  of  any  Robbery  or  Abufe  committed  upon  'em  in  the 
'  Town.i 

The  Spokefman  having  made  an  end  of  his  Speech,  returns 
to  his  Place,  and  takes  up  his  Pipe ;  and  then  the  Interpreter 
explains  the  Subftance  of  the  Harangue  to  the  Governour, 
who  commonly  gives  a  very  civil  Anfwer,  efpecially  if  the 
Prefent   be  valuable :  in   confideration  of  which,  he  likewife 


^See  Lahontan's  explanation  of  this  term  in  his  Table,  post.  John  Long,  an 
English  trader  of  a  century  later,  gives  nearly  the  same  form  for  the  Algonquian  word. 
See  Long,  Voyages  and  Travels  (Thwaites's  ed.,  Cleveland,  1904),  p.  242.  —  Ed. 


94  Some  New  Voyages  i 

makes  them  a  Prefent  of  fome  trifling  things.  This  done,  the 
Savages  rife  up,  and  return  to  their  Hutts  to  make  fuitable 
Preparations  for  the  enfuing  Truck. 

The  next  day  the  Savages  make  their  Slaves  carry  the 
Skins  to  the  Houfes  of  the  Merchants,  who  bargain  with 
'em  for  fuch  Cloaths  as  they  want.  All  the  Inhabitants  of 
Monreal  are  allow'd  to  traffick  with  [50]  'em  in  any  Com- 
modity but  Wine  and  Brandy  ;  thefe  two  being  excepted  upon 
the  account  that  when  the  Savages  have  got  what  they  wanted, 
and  have  any  Skins  left,  they  drink  to  excefs,  and  then  kill 
their  Slaves  ;  for  when  they  are  in  drink,  they  quarrel  and 
fight;  and  if  they  were  not  held  by  thofe  who  are  fober, 
wou'd  certainly  make  Havock  one  of  another.^  However, 
you  muft  obferve,  that  none  of  'em  will  touch  either  Gold  or 
Silver.  'Tis  a  comical  fight,  to  fee  'em  running  from  Shop  to 
Shop,  ftark  naked,  with  their  Bow  and  Arrow.  The  nicer  fort 
of  Women  are  wont  to  hold  their  Fans  before  their  eyes, 
to  prevent  their  being  frighted  with  the  view  of  their  ugly 
Parts.  But  thefe  merry  Companions,  who  know  the  brisk 
She- Merchants  as  well  as  we,  are  not  wanting  in  making  an 
Offer,  which  is  fometimes  accepted  of,  when  the  Prefent  is  of 


.  1  The  sale  of  liquor  to  the  Indians  had  long  agitated  the  colony.  Champlain 
forbade  the  traffic  (1633),  except  under  strict  control;  but  by  1660  it  had  attained 
such  excesses  that  Bishop  Laval  pronounced  excommunication  against  all  colonists 
who  sold  brandy  to  savages,  and  the  following  year  secured  a  royal  edict  punishing 
the  crime  with  death.  The  excitement  in  the  colony  was  so  great  that  the  edict  was 
revoked,  and  in  Frontenac's  first  governorship  a  compromise  established,  whereby  the 
carrying  of  liquor  into  the  woods  was  prohibited,  but  a  moderate  sale  allowed  in  the 
colony.  The  question  never  ceased  to  be  agitated  by  the  missionaries,  and  the  evasions 
of  the  ordinance  by  coureurs  des  bois  were  a  standing  grievance.  —  Ed. 


to  North- Ax)L\^v\c2i,  95 

good  Mettle.  If  we  may  credit  the  common  Report,  there 
are  more  than  one  or  two  of  the  Ladies  of  this  Country, 
whofe  Conftancy  and  Vertue  has  held  out  againft  the  Attacks 
of  feveral  Officers,  and  at  the  fame  time  vouchfaf'd  a  free 
accefs  to  thefe  nafty  Lechers.  'Tis  prefum'd  their  Com- 
pliance was  the  Effed  of  Curiofity,  rather  than  of  any  nice 
Relifh;  for,  in  a  word,  the  Savages  are  neither  brisk,  nor 
conftant.  But  whatever  is  in  the  matter,  the  Women  are  the 
more  excufable  upon  this  Head,  that  fuch  Opportunities  are 
very  unfrequent. 

As  foon  as  the  Savages  have  made  an  end  of  their  Truck, 
they  take  leave  of  the  Governour,  and  fo  return  home  by  the 
River  of  Outaouas}  To  conclude,  they  did  a  great  deal  of 
good  both  to  the  Poor  and  Rich ;  for  you  will  readily  appre- 
hend, that  every  body  turns  Merchant  upon  fuch  occafions. 

I  am,  SIR,  Yours,  &c. 

1  The  Ottawa  River  was  at  first  called  River  of  the  Algonkins,  and  Riviere  des 
Prairies.  Its  present  name  arose  not  from  its  being  the  habitat  of  the  Ottawa  tribe, 
but  because  it  was  the  route  by  which  the  Ottawa  came  to  Canada  from  the  "  upper 
country  "   {pays  en  haul) .  —  Ed. 


96  Some  New  Voyages 


LETTER    IX. 

Dated  at  Boucherville,  Octob.  2.  1685. 

Being  an  Account  of  the  Commerce^  and  Trade  of  Monreal:  Of  the 
Arrival  of  the  Marquis  of  Denonville  with  fome  Troops  ;  and 
of  the  recalling  of  Mr.  de  la  Barre.  IFith  a  curious  Defcription 
of  certain  Licenfes  for  Trading  in  Beaver-skins  in  the  remote 
Countries. 

SIR, 

IRECEIV'D  your  fecond  Letter  three  Weeks  ago,  but  could 
not  fend  a  fpeedier  Anfvver,  by  reafon  that  none  of  our 
Ships  have  yet  fet  Sail  for  France.  Since  you  want  to  know 
the  nature  of  the  Trade  of  Monreal,  be  pleas'd  to  take  the 
following  Account. 

Almoft  all  the  Merchants  of  that  City  ad  only  on  the 
behalf  of  the  Quebec  Merchants,  whofe  Fadors  they  are. 
The  Barques  which  carry  thither  dry  Commodities,  as  well  as 
Wine  and  Brandy,  are  but  few  in  number;  but  then  they  make 
feveral  Voyages  in  one  Year  from  the  one  City  to  the  other. 
The  Inhabitants  of  the  Ifland  of  Monreal,  and  the  adjacent 
Cantons,  repair  twice  a  Year  to  the  City  of  Monreal,  where 
they  buy  Commodities  fifty  per  Cent,  dearer  than  at  Quebec. 
The  Savages  of  the  neighbouring  Countries,  whether  fettled 


to  7V(?r^/6-America.  97 

or  erratick,  carry  thither  the  Skins  of  Beavers,  Elks,  Caribous, 
Foxes,  and  wild  Cats ;  all  which,  they  truck  for  Fufees,  Pow- 
der, Lead,  and  other  Necefifaries.  There  every  one  is  allow'd 
to  trade ;  and  indeed  'tis  the  beft  place  for  the  getting  of  an 
Eftate  in  a  fliort  time.  All  the  Merchants  have  fuch  a  perfedl 
good  underftanding  one  with  another,  that  they  all  fell  at  the 
fame  price.  [52]  But  when  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Country 
find  their  Prices  exorbitant,  they  raife  their  Commodities  in 
proportion.  The  Gentlemen  that  have  a  Charge  of  Children, 
efpecially  Daughters,  are  oblig'd  to  be  good  Husbands,  in 
order  to  bear  the  Expence  of  the  magnificent  Cloaths  with 
which  they  are  fet  off;  for  Pride,  Vanity,  and  Luxury,  reign 
as  much  in  New  France  as  in  Old  France.  In  my  opinion, 
'twould  do  well,  if  the  King  would  order  Commodities  to  be 
rated  at  a  reafonable  Price,  and  prohibit  the  felling  of  Gold 
or  Silver  Brocadoes,  Fringes,  and  Ribbands,  as  well  as  Points 
and  rich  Laces. 

The  Marquis  of  Denonville  is  come  to  fucceed  Mr.  de  la 
Barre  in  the  quality  of  Governour-General ;  for  the  King  has 
recall'd  Mr.  de  la  Barre^  upon  the  Accufations  laid  againft 
him  by  his  Enemies.  To  be  fure,  you  who  are  in  France 
know  better  than  I,  that  Mr.  de  Denonville  was  Maitre  de 
Camp  to  the  Queen's  Regiment  of  Dragoons,  which  Place  he 
fold  to  Mr.  Murcey  when  the  King  beftow'd  this  Government 
upon  him;  and,  that  he  brought  with  him  fome  Companies  of 
Marines,  befides  his   Lady  and  his   Children:  for   it   feems 

the  danger  and  inconveniencies  that  attend  fuch  a  long  and 
7 


98  Some  New  Voyages 

troublefome  Voyage,  made  no  Impreilion  upon  her.^  This 
Governour  ftay'd  at  firft  fome  Weeks  at  Quebec^  after  which 
he  came  to  Monreal,  with  500  or  600  Men  of  Regular  Troops, 
and  fent  back  the  Captains  Hainaut^  Montortier,  and  du  Rivo, 
with  feveral  other  Officers.  His  Army  is  now  in  Winter 
Quarters  all  round  Monreal.  My  Quarters  are  at  a  Place 
call'd  Boucherville,  which  lies  at  the  diftance  of  three  Leagues 
from  Monreal.^  I  have  been  here  fifteen  Days,  and  in  all 
appearance  fhall  live  more  happily  than  in  the  Town,  abating 
for  the  Solitude  ;  for  at  leaft  I  fhall  have  no  other  oppofition 
to  encounter  in  the  cafe  of  Balls,  Gaming,  or  Feafting,  but  the 
zealous  Freaks  of  a  filly  Prieft.  I  am  inform'd,  that  the  Gov- 
ernour [53]  has  given  Orders  to  compleat  the  Fortifications  of 
Monreal,^  and  is  now  ready  to  embarque  for  Quebec,  where  our 
Governours  commonly  pafs  the  Winter.  The  Savages  I  fpoke 
of  in  my  laft,  met  the  Iroqiiefe  upon  the  great  River  of  the 
Oiitaoiias,  who  inform'd  'em  that  the  Englijh  were  making 
Preparations  to  tranfport  to  their  Villages  in  Mijfilimakbiac, 
better  and  cheaper  Commodities  than  thofe  they  had  from  the 


1  Jacques  Rene  de  Brisay,  marquis  de  Denonville,  had  served  in  the  French  armies 
for  thirty  years.  He  was  a  zealous  and  pious  officer,  but  unequal  to  the  difficulties  of 
the  situation  in  Canada;  recalled  in  1689,  he  was  given  honorable  preferment  at 
court.  Madame  de  Denonville  was  the  last  French  woman  of  rank  to  honor  Canada 
with  her  presence  at  the  government  house.  —  Ed. 

^Boucherville  was  founded  in  1667  by  Pierre  Boucher,  formerly  governor  of  Trois 
Rivieres,  and  the  first  Canadian  ennobled  by  the  king.  The  Boucher  family  was  one 
of  the  most  important  in  the  colony.  See  Suite,  "  Pierre  Boucher  et  son  Livre  "  in 
Can.  Roy.  Soc.  Proc,  series  ii,  vol.  ii,  sec.  i,  pp.  99-168.  —  Ed. 

^  Montreal  until  this  time  had  scarcely  any  military  protection.  In  1685  six  hun- 
dred men  were  employed,  under  a  royal  engineer,  in  erecting  a  palisade  over  twelve 
feet  in  height,  with  five  gates  and  five  posterns.  —  Ed. 


to  N orth- A.mmc2i,  99 

French.  This  piece  of  News  did  equally  alarm  the  Gentlemen, 
the  Pedlers  call'd  Coureurs  de  Bois,  and  the  Merchants  ;  who,  at 
that  rate,  would  be  confiderable  Lofers :  for  you  muft  know, 
that  Canada  fubfifts  only  upon  the  Trade  of  Skins  or  Furrs, 
three  fourths  of  which  come  from  the  People  that  live  round 
the  great  Lakes :  So  that  if  the  EngUfli  fhould  put  fuch  a 
Defign  in  execution,  the  whole  Country  would  fuffer  by  it ; 
efpecially  confidering,  that  'twould  fink  certain  Licenfes :  an 
Account  of  which  will  be  proper  in  this  place. 

Thefe  Licenfes  are  granted  in  Writing  by  the  Governours 
General,  to  poor  Gentlemen  and  old  Officers  who  have  a  Charge 
of  Children.  They  are  difpos'd  of  by  the  King's  Orders;  and 
the  Defign  of  'em  is,  to  enable  fuch  Perfons  to  fend  Com- 
modities to  thefe  Lakes.  The  Number  of  the  Perfons  thus 
impower'd,  ought  not  to  exceed  twenty  five  in  one  Year:  but 
God  knows  how  many  more  have  private  Licenfes.  All  other 
Perfons,  of  what  Quality  or  Condition  foever,  are  prohibited 
to  go  or  fend  to  thefe  Lakes,  without  fuch  Licenfes,  under  the 
pain  of  Death. ^  Each  Licenfe  extends  to  the  lading  of  two 
great  Canows ;  and  whoever  procures  a  whole  or  a  half  Licenfe 
for  himfelf,  may  either  make  ufe  of  it  himfelf,  or  fell  it  to  the 


1  The  licenses  (conges)  for  trade  in  the  Western  country  were  established  in  the 
latter  years  of  Frontenac's  first  administration,  partly,  as  Lahontan  says,  as  a  measure 
of  charity  or  relief,  partly  as  a  means  of  restricting  the  coureurs  des  bois.  The  abuses 
were  so  great  that  in  1697  the  king  revoked  all  licenses  and  abolished  the  system.  At 
the  close  of  Queen  Anne's  War  (1702-13) ,  the  licenses  were  again  issued,  and  utilized 
as  a  means  for  provisioning  expeditions  against  the  Foxes  and  the  other  recalcitrant 
Indians  of  the  upper  country.  See  H^is.  Hist.  Colls.,  xvi,  xvii.  This  policy  was 
maintained  throughout  the  French  regime.  Henry  describes  it  as  still  existing  in 
1765  ;  see  his  Travels  and  Adventures  (Bain's  ed.,  Boston,  1901),  pp.  183,  184. — Ed, 


loo  Some  New  Voyages 

higheft  Bidder.  Commonly  they  are  bought  at  fix  hundred 
Crowns  a-piece.  Thofe  who  purchafe  'em  are  at  no  trouble 
in  finding  Pedlars  or  Foreft-Rangers  to  undertake  the  long 
Voyages,  which  fetch  the  mofl  confiderable  [54]  Gains,  and 
commonly  extend  to  a  Year,  and  fometimes  more.  The  Mer- 
chants put  into  the  two  Canows  ftipulated  in  the  Licenfe,  fix 
Men  with  a  thoufand  Crowns-worth  of  Goods,  which  are  rated 
to  the  Pedlars  at  fifteen  per  Cent,  more  than  what  they  are  fold 
for  in  ready  Money  in  the  Colony.  When  the  Voyage  is  per- 
form'd,  this  Sum  of  a  thoufand  Crowns  commonly  brings  in 
feven  hundred  per  Cent,  clear  profit,  and  fometimes  more, 
fometimes  lefs ;  for  thefe  Sparks  call'd  Coureurs  de  Bois  bite 
the  Savages  mofl  dexteroufly,  and  the  lading  of  two  Canows, 
computed  at  a  thoufand  Crowns,  is  a  Purchafe  for  as  many 
Beaver-skins  as  will  load  four  Canows:  Now,  four  Canows 
will  carry  a  hundred  and  fixty  Packs  of  Skins,  that  is,  forty 
a-piece ;  and  reckoning  each  Pack  to  be  worth  fifty  Crowns, 
the  value  of  the  whole  amounts  to  eight  thoufand  Crowns. 
As  to  the  Repartition  of  this  extravagant  Profit,  'tis  made  after 
the  following  manner :  In  the  firfl  place,  the  Merchant  takes 
out  of  the  whole  bulk  fix  hundred  Crowns  for  the  Purchafe 
of  his  Licenfe  ;  then  a  thoufand  Crowns  for  the  prime  Coft  of 
the  exported  Commodities.  After  this,  there  remains  6400 
Crowns  of  Surplufage,  out  of  which  the  Merchant  takes  forty 
per  Cent,  for  Bottomree,  which  amounts  to  2560  Crowns;  and 
the  Remainder  is  divided  equally  among  the  fix  Coureurs  de 
Bois,  who  get  little  more  than  600  Crowns  a-piece :  and  indeed 
I  mufl  fay  'tis  fairly  earn'd  ;  for  their  Fatigue  is  inconceivable. 


to  TVor/^- America.  loi 

In  the  mean  time,  you  muft  remark,  that  over  and  above  the 
foregoing  profit,  the  Merchant  gets  25  per  Cent,  upon  his 
Beaver-skins  by  carrying  them  to  the  Office  of  the  Farmers 
General,  where  the  Price  of  four  forts  of  Beaver-skins  is 
fix'd.  If  the  Merchant  fells  thefe  Skins  to  any  private  Man 
in  the  Country  for  ready  Money,  he  is  paid  in  the  current 
Money  of  the  Country,  which  is  of  lefs  value  than  the  Bills 
of  Exchange  that  the  Diredlor  of  [55]  that  Office  draws  upon 
Rocbel  or  Paris ;  for  there  they  are  paid  in  French  Livres,  which 
are  twenty  Sols,  whereas  a  Canada  Livre  is  but  fifteen  Sols. 
This  Advantage  of  25  per  Cent,  is  call'd  le  Benefice;  but  take 
notice,  that  'tis  only  to  be  had  upon  Beaver-skins :  for,  if  you 
pay  to  a  Quebec  Merchant  400  Canada  Livres  in  Silver,  and 
take  from  him  a  Bill  of  Exchange  upon  his  Correfpondent  in 
France,  his  Correfpondent  will  pay  no  more  than  300  French 
Livres,  which  is  a  juft  Equivalent. 

This  is  the  laft  Intelligence  I  fhall  give  you  for  this  Year, 
v/hich  has  already  brought  in  a  very  Qo\d  Autumn,  The  Quebec 
Ships  muft  fet  Sail  in  the  middle  of  November,  purfuant  to  the 
wonted  Cuftom.     I  am, 

SIR, 

Tours,  &c. 


102  Some  New  Voyages 


LETTER    X. 

Dated  at  Boucherville  July  8.  1686. 

Relating  the  Arrival  of  Mr.  de  Champlgni,  in  the  room  of  Mr. 
de  Meules,  who  is  recaWd  to  France ;  the  arrival  of  the 
Troops  that  came  along  with  him,  the  curiofity  of  the  Rackets, 
and  the  way  of  hunting  Elks;  with  a  Defcription  of  that 
Animal. 

SIR, 

THOUGH  I  have  not  heard  from  you  this  year,  yet  I  will 
not  flight  this  opportunity  of  writing  to  you.  Some 
Ships  from  France  are  arriv'd  at  Quebec,  and  have  brought 
over  Mr.  de  Champigni  Noroua,  [^6]  with  fome  Companies  of 
Marines.  He  comes  to  fupply  the  place  of  Mr.  de  Meules, 
whom  the  King  recalls  upon  the  unjuft  complaints  that  are 
made  of  him.  He  is  charg'd  with  preferring  his  private  Inter- 
eft  to  the  publick  Good ;  but  the  charge  is  falfe,  and  he  will 
eafily  clear  himfelf.  I  am  apt  to  believe  he  may  have  carry'd 
on  fome  underhand  Commerce^  but  in  fo  doing  he  injur'd 
no  body;  nay,  on  the  contrary  he  has  procur'd  Bread  for  a 
thoufand  poor  Creatures,  that  without  his  AfTiftance  would 
have  ftarv'd  for  Hunger.  This  new  Intendant  is  defcended 
of  one  of  the  moft  Illuftrious  Families  of  the  Robe  in  France. 
He  is  faid  to  be  a  Man  of  Honour,  and  Fame  entitles  his 


to  North-Kmcvic^.,  103 

Lady  to  a  diftlngulfhing  Merit :  I  underftand,  he  and  Mr. 
Denonville  are  bound  fpeedlly  for  Monreal^  where  they  mean 
to  take  a  review  of  the  Inhabitants  of  this  Ifland,  and  of  the 
Neighbouring  Cantons.^  Probably,  they  take  fuch  precau- 
tions in  order  to  fome  new  effort  agalnft  the  Iroquefe.  Laft 
Winter  we  had  no  new  Occurrences  in  the  Colony.  I  fpent 
the  whole  Winter  at  the  hunting  of  Orlgnals  or  Elks  along 
with  the  Savages,  whofe  Language  I  am  learning,  as  I  have 
intimated  to  you  feveral  tlmes.^ 

The  hunting  of  Elks  is  perform'd  upon  the  Snow,  with 
fuch  Rackets  as  you  fee  defign'd  in  the  annex'd  Cutt.  Thefe 
Rackets  are  two  Foot  and  a  half  long,  and  fourteen  Inches 
broad  ;  their  ledges  are  made  of  a  very  hard  Wood,  about  an 
Inch  thick,  that  faftens  the  Net  juft  like  a  Tennis  Racket,  from 
which  they  differ  only  in  this ;  that  thofe  for  the  Tennis  are 
made  of  Gut-ftrings,  whereas  the  others  are  made  of  little 
thongs  of  the  skins  of  Harts  or  Elks.  In  the  Cut,  you  may 
perceive  two  little  fpars  of  Wood,  which  run  a-crofs  to  render 
the  Net  firmer  and  ftiffer.  The  hole  that  appears  by  the  two 
Latchets,  is  the  place  in  which  they  put  the  Toes  and  fore- 


^  Jean  Bochart  de  Champigny  was  one  of  the  most  able  and  faithful  of  Canadian 
intendants.  He  was  sent  (1686)  to  replace  Jacques  de  Mueles,  who  had  come  out 
with  La  Barre  (1682),  but  had  proven  his  bitter  enemy,  and  was  also  complained  of 
by  the  new  governor  Denonville.  Champigny  lived  in  concord  with  the  latter,  with 
whose  politics  he  coincided.  The  harmony  with  Frontenac  was  less  sincere  ;  but  in 
the  last  years  of  the  latter,  they  became  good  friends.  Champigny  was  recalled  to 
France  (1702)  to  take  position  as  intendant  at  Havre.  —  Ed. 

2  The  "  original  "  or  elk  of  Canada  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  American 
elk  or  wapiti  {Cervus  Canadensis) ,  called  La  Biche  by  the  French  ;  this  is  the  moose 
of  northern  North  America  {Ceri'us  alches) .  See  Caton,  Antelope  and  Deer  of  North 
America  (New  York,  1877).  —  Ed. 


104  Some  New  Voyages 

part  of  the  Foot ;  fo  that  'tis  tied  faft  by  [57]  the  two  Latch- 
ets,  which  run  twice  round  about  the  Heel,  and  every  ftep 
they  make  upon  the  Snow,  the  fore-part  of  the  Foot  finks  into 
that  hole,  as  often  as  they  raife  their  Heel.  By  the  help  of 
this  Contrivance  they  walk  fafter  upon  the  Snow,  than  one 
can  do  with  Shoes  upon  a  beaten  path :  And  indeed  'tis  fo 
neceffary  for  them,  that  'twould  be  otherwife  impofTible  not 
only  to  hunt  and  range  the  Woods,  but  even  to  go  to  Church, 
notwithftanding  they  are  fo  near ;  for  commonly  the  Snow  is 
three  or  four  Foot  deep  in  that  Country  during  the  Winter. 
Being  oblig'd  to  march  thirty  or  forty  Leagues  in  the  Woods 
in  purfuit  of  the  above-mention'd  Animals,  I  found  that  the 
fatigue  of  the  Journey  equal'd  the  pleafure  of  it. 

The  Orignal  is  a  fort  of  Elk,  not  much  different  from  that 
we  find  in  Mufcovy.  'Tis  as  big  as  an  Aiivergne  Moyle,  and 
much  of  the  fame  fhape,  abating  for  its  Muzzle,  its  Tail,  and  its 
great  flat  Horns,  which  weigh  fometimes  300,  and  fometimes 
400  weight,  if  we  may  credit  thofe  who  pretend  to  have 
weigh'd  'em.  This  Animal  ufually  reforts  to  planted  Coun- 
tries. Its  Hair  is  long  and  brown;  and  the  Skin  is  ftrong  and 
hard,  but  not  thick.  The  Flefli  of  the  Orignal^  efpecially  that 
of  the  Female  fort,  eats  delicioufly;  and  'tis  faid,  that  the  far 
hind  Foot  of  the  Female  kind,  is  a  Cure  for  the  Falling- 
Sicknefs ;  it  neither  runs  nor  skips,  but  its  trot  will  almoft 
keep  up  with  the  running  of  a  Hart.  The  Savages  affure  us, 
that  in  Summer  'twill  trot  three  Days  and  three  Nights  with- 
out intermiffion.  This  fort  of  Animals  commonly  gather  into 
a  body  towards  the  latter  end  of  Autumn ;  and  the  Herds  are 


to  iVor^y^- America.  105 

largeft  in  the  beginning  of  the  Spring,  at  which  time  the  fhe 
ones  are  in  rutting ;  but  after  their  heat  is  over,  they  all  dif- 
perfe  themfelves.  We  hunted  'em  in  the  following  manner; 
Firft  of  all,  we  went  40  Leagues  to  the  Northward  of  the  River 
of  St.  Laurence^  [58]  where  we  found  a  little  Lake  of  three  or 
four  Leagues  in  Circumference,  and  upon  the  banks  of  that 
Lake,  we  made  Hutts  for  our  felves  of  the  barks  of  Trees, 
having  firft  clear'd  the  Ground  of  the  Snow  that  cover'd  it. 
In  our  Journey  thither,  we  kill'd  as  many  Hares  and  Wood- 
hens,  as  we  could  eat.  When  we  had  fitted  up  our  Hutts,  the 
Savages  went  out  upon  the  difcovery  of  the  Elks,  fome  to  the 
Northward,  and  fome  to  the  South,  to  the  diftance  of  two  or 
three  Leagues  from  the  Hutts.  As  foon  as  they  difcover'd 
any  frefh  foot-fteps,  they  detach'd  one  of  their  number  to  give 
us  notice,  to  the  end,  that  the  whole  Company  might  have  the 
pleafure  of  feeing  the  chace.  We  trac'd  thefe  foot-fteps  fome- 
times  for  one,  and  fometimes  for  two  Leagues,  and  then  fell 
in  with  five,  ten,  fifteen  or  twenty  Elks  in  a  body ;  which  pref- 
ently  betook  themfelves  to  flight,  whether  a  part  or  in  a  Body, 
and  funk  into  the  Snow  up  to  their  Breaft.  Where  the  Snow 
was  hard  and  condenfated,  or  where  the  froft  following  wet 
Weather  had  glaz'd  it  above,  we  came  up  with  'em  after  the 
chace  of  a  quarter  of  a  League  :  But  when  the  Snow  was  foft 
or  juft  fallen,  we  were  forc'd  to  purfue  'em  three  or  four 
Leagues  before  we  could  catch  'em,  unlefs  the  Dogs  happen'd 
to  ftop  'em  where  the  Snow  was  very  deep.  When  we  came 
up  with  them,  the  Savages  fired  upon  'em  with  Fufees.  If  the 
Elks  be  much  inrag'd  they'll  fometimes  turn  upon  the  Sav- 


io6  Some  New  Voyages 

ages,  who  cover  themfelves  with  Boughs  in  order  to  keep  off 
their  Feet,  with  which  they  would  crufh  'em  to  pieces.  As 
foon  as  they  are  kill'd,  the  Savages  make  new  Hutts  upon  the 
fpot,  with  great  Fires  in  the  middle ;  while  the  Slaves  are 
imploy'd  in  fleaing  'em,  and  ftretching  out  the  Skins  in  the 
open  Air.  One  of  the  Soldiers  that  accompany'd  me,  told  me 
one  Day,  that  to  withftand  the  violence  of  the  Cold,  one  ought 
to  have  his  Blood  compos'd  of  Brandy,  [59]  his  Body  of 
Brafs,  and  his  Eyes  of  Glafs:  And  I  muft  fay,  he  had  fome 
ground  for  what  he  fpoke,  for  we  were  forc'd  to  keep  a  Fire 
all  round  us,  all  the  Night  long.  As  long  as  the  Fiefh  of  thefe 
Animals  lafts,  the  Savages  feldom  think  of  ftirring ;  but  when 
'tis  all  confum'd,  they  then  look  out  for  a  new  Difcovery. 
Thus  they  continue  to  hunt,  till  the  Snow  and  the  Ice  are 
melted.  As  foon  as  the  great  thaw  commences,  'tis  impoffible 
for  'em  to  travel  far ;  fo  that  they  content  themfelves  with  the 
killing  of  Hares  and  Partridges,  which  are  very  numerous  in 
the  Woods.  When  the  Rivers  are  clear  of  the  Ice,  they  make 
Canows  of  the  Elk-skins,  which  they  fow  together  very  eafily, 
covering  the  Seams  with  a  fat  fort  of  Earth  inftead  of  pitch. 
This  work  is  over  in  four  or  five  days  time,  after  which  they 
return  home  in  the  Canows  with  all  their  Baggage. 

This,  Sir,  was  our  Diverfion  for  three  Months  in  the  Woods. 
We  took  fifty  fix  Elks,  and  might  have  kill'd  twice  as  many, 
if  we  had  hunted  for  the  benefit  of  the  Skins,  In  the  Summer 
feafon,  the  Savages  have  two  ways  of  killing  'em,  both  of  which 
are  equally  troublefom.  One  confifl:s  in  hanging  a  Rope-gin 
between  two  Trees,  upon  a  Pafs  furrounded  with  Thorns  ;  the 


to  7Vor^/6- America.  107 

other  is  compafs'd  by  crauling  like  Snakes  among  the  Trees 
and  Thickets,  and  approaching  to  'em  upon  the  Leeward  fide, 
fo  that  they  may  be  fhot  with  a  Fufee.  Harts  and  Caribous 
are  kill'd  both  in  Summer  and  Winter,  after  the  fame  manner 
with  the  Elks;  excepting  that  the  Caribou's, which  are  a  kind 
of  wild  Affes,  make  an  eafie  efcape  when  the  Snow  is  hard,  by 
vertue  of  their  broad  Feet;  whereas  the  Elk  finks  as  faft  as 
he  rifes.^  In  fine,  I  am  fo  well  pleas'd  with  the  hunting  of  this 
Country,  that  I  have  refolv'd  to  imploy  all  my  leifure  time 
upon  the  Exercife.  The  Savages  have  promifed,  that  in  three 
Months  time  [60]  I  fhall  fee  other  forts  of  chafes,  which  will 
prove  lefs  fatiguing,  and  more  agreeable.     I  am, 

SIR, 

Tours,  &c. 


1  Caribou  is  the  American  woodland  reindeer,  Rang'ifer  caribou  or  tarandus. 
By  the  term  ' '  hart, ' '  Lahontan  intends  the  common  deer,  Cervus  'virginianus .  —  Ed. 


io8  Some  New  Voyages 


LETTER   XL 

Dated  at  Boucherville  May  28.  1687. 
Being  a  curious  Defcription  of  the  Hunting  of  divers  Animals. 

SIR, 

YOU  complain  that  the  laft  year  you  receiv'd  but  one  of 
my  Letters,  dated  July  8.  and  with  the  fame  breath  affure 
me,  that  you  writ  two  to  me,  neither  of  which  is  come  to  hand. 
I  receiv'd  a  Letter  from  you  this  Day,  which  is  fo  much  the 
more  acceptable,  that  I  thought  you  had  been  dead,  and 
that  I  find  you  continue  to  give  proof  of  your  remembrance 
of  me.  I  find  by  your  Letter,  that  you  have  an  agreeable 
relifh  for  the  curious  Elk-Hunting  in  this  Country,  and  that 
a  further  account  of  our  other  hunting  Adventures,  would 
meet  with  a  welcome  Reception.  This  Curiofity,  indeed,  is 
worthy  of  fo  great  a  Hunts-Man  as  your  felf ;  but  at  prefent 
I  muft  beg  your  excufe  as  to  the  Beaver-hunting,  for  I  know 
nothing  of  it  yet  but  by  hear-fay. 

In  the  beginning  of  September,  I  fet  out  in  a  Canow  upon 
feveral  Rivers,  Marfhes,  and  Pools,  that  difembogue  in  the 
Champlain  Lake,  being  accompany'd  with  thirty  or  forty  of 
the  Savages  that  are  very  expert  in  Shooting  and  Hunting, 
and  perfedlly  [61]  well  acquainted  with  the  proper  places  for 
finding  Water-foul,  Deer,  and  other  fallow  Beafts.     The  firft 


to  North- KmQnc2i,  109 

Poft  we  took  up  was  upon  the  fide  of  a  Marfh  or  Fen  of  four 
or  five  Leagues  in  Circumference ;  and  after  we  had  fitted  up 
our  Hutts,  the  Savages  made  Hutts  upon  the  Water  in  feveral 
places.  Thefe  Water-Hutts  are  made  of  the  branches  and 
leaves  of  Trees,  and  contain  three  or  four  Men :  For  a  Decoy 
they  have  the  skins  of  Geefe,  Buftards,  and  Ducks,  dry'd  and 
ftufi^'d  with  Hay,  the  two  feet  being  made  faft  with  two  Nails 
to  a  fmall  piece  of  a  light  plank,  which  floats  round  the  Hutt. 
This  place  being  frequented  by  wonderful  numbers  of  Geefe, 
Ducks,  Buftards,  Teals,  and  an  infinity  of  other  Fowl  unknown 
to  the.  Europeans  ;  when  thefe  Fowls  fee  the  ftufi^'d  Skins  fwim- 
ming  with  the  Heads  eredled,  as  if  they  were  alive,  they  repair 
to  the  fame  place,  and  fo  give  the  Savages  an  opportunity  of 
fhooting  'em,  either  flying,  or  upon  the  Water ;  after  which 
the  Savages  get  into  their  Canows  and  gather  'em  up.  They 
have  likewife  a  way  of  catching  'em  with  Nets,  ftretch'd  upon 
the  furface  of  the  Water  at  the  Entries  of  the  Rivers.  In  a 
word,  we  eat  nothing  but  Water-fowl  for  fifteen  Days;  after 
which  we  refolv'd  to  declare  War  againft  the  Turtle-Doves, 
which  are  fo  numerous  in  Canada^  that  the  Bifhop  has  been 
forc'd  to  excommunicate  'em  oftner  than  once,  upon  the 
account  of  the  Damage  they  do  to  the  Produd  of  the  Earth. 
With  that  view,  we  imbarqued  and  made  towards  a  Meadow, 
in  the  Neighbourhood  of  which,  the  Trees  were  cover'd  with 
that  fort  of  Fowl,  more  than  with  Leaves :  For  juft  then  'twas 
the  feafon  in  which  they  retire  from  the  North  Countries,  and 
repair  to  the  Southern  Climates  ;  and  one  would  have  thought, 
that  all  the  Turtle-Doves  upon  Earth  had  chofe  to  pafs  thro' 


iio  Some  New  Voyages 

this  place.  For  the  eighteen  or  twenty  days  that  we  ftay'd 
there,  I  firmly  believe  that  a  thoufand  [62]  Men  might  have 
fed  upon  'em  heartily,  without  putting  themfelves  to  any 
trouble.  You  muft  know,  that  through  the  middle  of  this 
Meadow  there  runs  a  Brook,  upon  which  I  and  two  young 
Savages  fhot  feveral  Snipes,  Rayles,  and  a  certain  fort  of  Fowl 
call'd  Bateurs  de  faux,  which  is  as  big  as  a  Quail,  and  eats  very 
delicioufly.^ 

In  the  fame  place  we  kill'd  fome  Musk-Rats,  or  a  fort  of 
Anim.als  which  refemble  a  Rat  in  their  fhape,  and  are  as  big 
as  a  Rabbet.  The  Skins  of  thefe  Rats  are  very  much  valued, 
as  differing  but  little  from  thofe  of  Beavers.  Their  Tefticles 
fmell  fo  ftrong  of  Musk,  that  no  Civet  or  Antilope  that  Jfia 
affords,  can  boaft  of  fuch  a  ftrong  and  fweet  fmell.  We  spy'd 
'em  in  the  Mornings  and  Evenings,  at  which  time  they  ufually 
appear  upon  the  Water  with  their  Nofe  to  the  Windward,  and 
betray  themfelves  to  the  Huntfmen,  by  the  curling  of  the 
Water.  The  Fouteraux,  which  are  an  amphibious  fort  of  little 
Pole-Cats,  are  catch'd  after  the  fame  manner.  I  was  likewife 
entertain'd  upon  this  occafion,  with  the  kilHng  of  certain  little 
Beafts,  call'd  Siffleurs,  or  Whiftlers,  with  allufion  to  their  wonted 
way  of  whittling  or  whizzing  at  the  Mouth  of  their  Holes  in 
fair  Weather.  They  are  as  big  as  Hares,  but  fomewhat  fhorter, 
their  Flefh  is  good  for  nothing,  but  their  Skins  are  recom- 


^  Many  early  travellers  speak  of  the  number  of  wild  pigeons  {Ectopistes  migra- 
toria).  See  Jesuit  Relations,  index.  Batteurs  de  faux  are  the  North  American  rail 
{Porzana  Carolina)  —  in  French,  rale  de  la  Caroline.  This  identification  is  made 
by  M.  Dionne,  curator  of  Laval  University,  Quebec.  —  Ed. 


to  North'AmQX\C2i,  in 

mended  by  their  rarity.  The  Savages  gave  me  an  opportunity 
of  hearing  one  of  thefe  Creafures  whittle  for  an  hour  together, 
after  which  they  fhot  it.^  To  gratifie  the  curiofity  I  had  to  fee 
fuch  diverfity  of  Animals,  they  made  a  diligent  fearch  for  the 
Holes  or  Dens  of  the  CarcaiouXy  and  having  found  fome  at  the 
diftance  of  two  or  three  Leagues  from  the  Fen  upon  which  we 
were  pofted,  they  conduced  me  to  the  place.  At  the  break 
of  day  we  planted  our  felves  round  the  Holes,  with  our  Bellies 
upon  the  Ground ;  and  left  fome  Slaves  to  hold  the  Dogs  a 
Musket-fhot  behind  {f)^]  ^^-  ^^  ^oo*^  ^^  thefe  Animals  per- 
ceiv'd  Day-light,  they  came  out  of  their  Holes,  which  were 
immediately  ftop'd  up  by  the  Savages,  and  upon  that  the 
Dogs  fetch'd  'em  up  with  eafe.  We  faw  but  two  of  'em, 
which  made  a  vigorous  defence  againft  the  Dogs,  but  were 
ftrangled  after  a  difpute  of  half  an  hour.  Thefe  Animals  are 
not  unlike  a  Badger,  only  they  are  bigger,  and  more  mifchiev- 
ous.^  Tho'  our  Dogs  shew'd  a  great  deal  of  Courage  in  attack- 
ing the  Carcaioux,  they  betray'd  their  Cowardice  the  next  day 
in  a  rencounter  with  a  Porcupine,  which  we  fpy'd  upon  a  little 
Tree.  To  obtain  the  pleafure  of  feeing  the  Porcupine  fall,  we 
cut  down  the  Tree ;  but  neither  the  Dogs  nor  we  durft  go 
near  it:  The  Dogs  only  bark'd  and  jump'd  round  it;  for  it 
darted  its  long  and  hard  hair  like  fo  many  Bodkins,  three  or 


^  Muskrats  {Fiber  zibethicus)  are  widely  distributed  over  the  North  American 
continent.  The  "  whistler  "  is  the  hoary  marmot  {Arctomys  pruniosus) .  M.  Dionne 
thinks  that  "  foutereaux  "  must  be  mink  {Lutreola  'vison),  which  is  amphibious, 
preys  on  fish,  and  is  a  foe  to  the  muskrat.  —  Ed. 

2  Carcajou  is  the  usual  Canadian  term  for  the  wolverine  [Gulo  luscus),  also 
called  at  times  the  "  beaver  eater." — Ed. 


112  Some  New  Voyages 

four  paces  off.  At  laft  we  pelted  it  to  death,  and  put  it  upon 
the  fire  to  burn  off  its  Darts ;  after  which  we  fcalded  it  like  a 
Pig,  took  out  the  Intrails,  and  roafted  it :  But  tho'  'twas  very 
fat,  I  could  not  relifh  it  fo  well  as  to  comply  with  the  affertion 
of  the  Natives,  who  alledge,  that  it  eats  as  well  as  a  Capon  or 
a  Partridge. 

After  the  Turtle-Doves  had  all  pafs'd  over  the  place,  in 
queft  of  their  Southern  retreats,  the  Savages  offer'd  to  fend 
fome  of  their  number  with  Canows  to  condudl  me  home,  before 
the  Rivers  and  Lakes  were  frozen  over ;  for  themfelves  were 
to  tarry  out  for  the  Elk-hunting ;  and  they  imagin'd  that  the 
Cold  and  Hardfhip  attending  that  Exercife,  had  made  me  lick 
of  it  the  year  before.  However,  we  had  then  a  Month  good 
before  the  commencement  of  the  Froft,  and  in  that  interval 
of  time,  they  proffer'd  to  entertain  me  with  more  diverting 
Game  than  any  I  had  feen  before.  They  propos'd  to  go  fif- 
teen or  fixteen  Leagues  further  up  the  Country,  affuring  me, 
that  they  knew  of  a  certain  place  that  had  the  moft  advan- 
tageous fituation  [64]  in  the  World,  both  for  Pleafure  and 
Profit,  and  that  afforded  great  plenty  of  Otters,  of  the  Skins 
of  which  they  mean'd  to  make  a  great  Cargoe.  Accordingly 
we  pull'd  down  our  Hutts,  and  having  imbarqu'd  in  our 
Canows,  fail'd  up  the  River,  till  we  came  to  a  little  Lake  of 
two  Leagues  in  Circumference,  at  the  end  of  which  we  faw 
another  greater  Lake,  divided  from  this  by  an  Ifthmus  of  150 
Paces  in  length.  We  pitch'd  our  Hutts  at  the  diftance  of  a 
League  from  that  Iflhmus;  and  fome  of  the  Savages  fifli'd  for 
Trouts,  while  the  reft  were  imploy'd  in  laying  Traps  for  the 


to  iVor^/?>- America.  113 

Otters  upon  the  brinks  of  the  Lake.  Thefe  Traps  are  made 
of  five  Stakes  plac'd  in  the  form  of  an  oblong  Quadrangle, 
fo  as  to  make  a  little  Chamber,  the  Door  of  which  is  kept  up, 
and  fupported  by  a  Stake.  To  the  middle  of  this  Stake  they 
tye  a  ftring  which  paffes  thro'  a  little  fork,  and  has  a  Trout 
well  faften'd  to  the  end  of  it.  Now,  when  the  Otter  comes 
on  fhoar,  and  fees  this  bait,  he  puts  above  half  his  Body  into 
that  fatal  Cage,  in  order  to  fwallow  the  Fifh ;  but  he  no 
fooner  touches,  than  the  firing  to  which  'tis  made  faft  pulls 
away  the  Stake  that  fupports  the  Door,  upon  which  an  heavy 
and  loaded  Door  falls  upon  his  Reins  and  quafhes  him. 
During  our  Pilgrimage  in  that  part  of  the  Country,  the  Sav- 
ages took  above  two  hundred  and  fifty  Canada  Otters ;  the 
Skins  of  which  are  infinitely  prittier  than  thofe  of  Mitfcovy  or 
Swede}!.  The  beft  of  'em  which  are  not  worth  two  Crowns  in 
this  place,  are  fold  in  France  for  four  or  five,  and  fometimes 
for  ten,  if  they  are  black  and  very  rough.  As  foon  as  the 
Savages  had  fet  their  Traps,  they  gave  orders  to  their  Slaves 
to  go  round  the  Lake  every  Morning,  in  order  to  take  out  the 
amphibious  Animals.  After  that  they  conduded  me  to  the 
above-mention'd  Ifthmus,  where  I  was  furpriz'd  to  fee  a  fort 
of  a  Park  or  Fence  made  of  Trees,  fell'd  one  upon  another, 
[65]  and  interlac'd  with  Thorns  and  Branches;  with  a  quad- 
rangular inclofure  of  Stakes  at  the  end  of  it,  the  entry  of 
which  was  very  narrow.  They  gave  me  to  know,  that  they 
ufed  to  hunt  Harts  in  that  place,  and  promis'd  to  divert  me 
with  the  fhew,  as  foon  as  the  Inclofures  were  a  little  mended. 
In  eflFe6l,  they  carry'd  me  two   or  three  Leagues  oflF,  upon 


114  Sotne  New  Voyages 

fuch  Roads  as  had  nothing  on  either  fide  but  Fens  and 
Marfhes ;  and  after  they  had  difpers'd  themfelves,  fome  on 
one  hand  and  fome  on  the  other,  with  a  Dog  for  every  Man ; 
I  faw  a  great  many  Harts  running  to  and  again,  in  queft  of 
places  of  Safety.  The  Savage  that  I  kept  company  with, 
affur'd  m.e,  that  he  and  I  had  no  occafion  to  walk  very  faft, 
becaufe  he  had  took  the  ftraighteft  and  the  neareft  Road. 
Before  us  we  faw  above  ten  Harts,  which  were  forc'd  to  turn 
back,  rather  than  throw  themfelves  into  the  Marfh,  of  which 
they  could  never  get  clear.  At  laft,  after  walking  a  great 
pace,  and  running  now  and  then,  we  arriv'd  at  the  Park,  and 
found  the  Savages  lying  flat  upon  the  Ground  all  round  it,  in 
order  to  fhut  up  the  entry  of  the  ftake  Inclofure  as  foon  as 
the  Harts  enter'd.  We  found  thirty  five  Harts  in  the  place, 
and,  if  the  Park  had  been  better  fenc'd,  we  might  have  had 
above  fixty;  for  the  nimblefl:  and  lighteft:  of  'em,  skip'd  over 
before  they  came  to  enter  the  Inclofure.  We  kill'd  a  great 
many  of  'em,  but  fpar'd  the  Dams,  becaufe  they  were  great 
with  young.  I  ask'd  of  the  Savages  the  Tongues  and  the 
Marrow  of  the  Harts,  which  they  gave  me  very  readily.  The 
Flefii  was  very  fat,  but  not  deUcious,  excepting  fome  few  bits 
about  the  Ribs.  But  after  all,  this  was  not  our  only  Game ; 
for  two  days  after  we  went  a  Bear-hunting,  and  the  Savages 
who  fpend  three  parts  of  four  of  their  life  in  Hunting  in  the 
Woods,  are  very  dexterous  at  that  Exercife,  efpecially  in  fing- 
ling  out  the  Trunks  of  the  Trees  upon  [66]  which  the  Bears 
Neftle.  I  could  not  but  admire  their  knowledge  in  that  Point, 
when,  as  we  were  walking  up  and  down  in  a  Foreft,  at  the 


to  7Vor^/6- America.  115 

diftance  of  an  hundred  Paces  one  from  another,  I  heard  one 
Savage  call  to  another,  Here's  a  Bear.  I  askt  'em  how  he 
knew  that  there  was  a  Bear  upon  the  Tree  which  he  knock'd 
with  his  Axe ;  and  they  all  reply'd,  that  'twas  as  eafily  diftin- 
guifh'd  as  the  print  of  an  Elks  foot  in  the  Snow.  For  five  or 
fix  times  they  never  mifs'd  ;  for  after  they  had  knock'd  two 
or  three  times  upon  the  Trunk  of  the  Tree,  the  Bear  came 
out  of  its  hole,  and  was  prefently  fhot.  The  Canada  Bears 
are  extream  black,  but  not  mifchievous,  for  they  never  attack 
one,  unlefs  they  be  wounded  or  fir'd  upon.  They  are  fo  fat, 
efpecially  in  the  Autumn,  that  they  can  fcarce  walk :  Thofe 
which  we  kill'd  were  extream  fat,  but  their  fat  Is  good  for 
nothing  but  to  be  burnt,  whereas  their  Flefh,  and,  above  all, 
their  Feet  are  very  nice  Viduals.  The  Savages  affirm,  that  no 
Flefh  is  fo  delicious  as  that  of  Bears;  and  indeed,  I  think  they 
are  in  the  right  of  it.  While  we  rang'd  up  and  down  in  queft 
of  Bears,  we  had  the  pleafure  of  fpying  fome  Martins  and 
wild  Cats  upon  the  branches  of  the  Trees,  which  the  Savages 
fhot  in  the  Head  to  preferve  their  Skin.  But  the  mofl;  Com- 
ical thing  I  faw,  was  the  Stupidity  of  the  Wood-hens,  which 
fit  upon  the  Trees  in  whole  Flocks,  and  are  kill'd  one  after 
another,  without  ever  offering  to  ftir.  Commonly  the  Savages 
fhoot  at  'em  with  Arrows,  for  they  fay  they  are  not  worth  a 
fhoot  of  Powder,  which  is  able  to  kill  an  Elk  or  an  Hart.  I 
have  ply'd  this  fort  of  Fowling  in  the  Neighbourhood  of  our 
Cantons  or  Habitations  in  the  Winter  time,  with  the  help  of 
a  Dog  who  found  out  the  Trees  by  fcent,  and  then  bark'd  ; 
upon  which  I  approach'd  to  the  Tree,  and  found  the  Fowls 


ii6  Some  New  Voyages 

upon  the  Branches.  When  the  thaw  came,  I  went  two  or  three 
Leagues  further  [67]  up  the  Lake,  in  Company  with  fome 
Canadefe,  on  purpofe  to  fee  that  Fowl  flap  with  its  Wings. 
Believe  me.  Sir,  this  fight  is  one  of  the  greateft  Curiofities  in 
the  World ;  for  their  flapping  makes  a  noife  much  like  that 
of  a  Drum  all  about,  for  the  fpace  of  a  Minute  or  thereabouts ; 
then  the  noife  ceafes  for  half  a  quarter  of  an  Hour,  after 
which  it  begins  again.  By  this  noife  we  were  diredled  to  the 
place  where  the  unfortunate  Moor-hens  fat,  and  found  'em 
upon  rotten  moffy  Trees.  By  flapping  one  Wing  againft  the 
other,  they  mean  to  call  their  Mates ;  and  the  humming  noife 
that  infues  thereupon,  may  be  heard  half  a  quarter  of  a  League 
oflF.  This  they  do  only  in  the  Months  of  Aprils  May,  Septem- 
ber, and  October ;  and,  which  is  very  remarkable,  a  Moorhen 
never  flaps  in  this  manner,  but  upon  one  Tree.  It  begins  at 
the  break  of  day,  and  gives  over  at  nine  a  Clock  in  the  Morn- 
ing, till  about  an  hour  before  Sunfet  that  it  flutters  again,  and 
continues  fo  to  do  till  Night :  I  proteft  to  you,  that  I  have 
frequently  contented  my  felf  with  feeing  and  admiring  the 
flapping  of  their  Wings  without  ofi^ering  to  fhoot  at  'em. 

Befides  the  pleafure  of  fo  many  difi^erent  forts  of  Diverfion, 
I  was  likewife  entertain'd  in  the  Woods  with  the  company  of 
the  honeft  old  Gentlemen  that  liv'd  in  former  Ages.  Honeft: 
Homer,  the  amiable  Anacreon,  and  my  dear  Lucian,  were  my 
infeparable  Companions.  Arijlotle  too  defir'd  paflionately  to 
go  along  with  us,  but  my  Canow  was  too  little  to  hold  his 
bulky  Equipage  of  Peripatetick  Silogifms  :  So  that  he  was 
e'en  fain  to  trudge  back  to  the  Jefuits,  who  vouchfaf'd  him  a 


to  North- Avntnc2i.  117 

very  honourable  Reception.  I  had  a  great  deal  of  reafon 
to  rid  my  felf  of  that  great  Philofopher's  Company ;  for  his 
ridiculous  Jargon,  and  his  fenfelefs  Terms,  would  have  frighted 
the  Savages  out  of  their  wits.  Farewell,  Sir,  I  am  now  arriv'd 
at  once  at  the  end  of  [68]  my  Game  and  my  Letter.  I  have 
heard  no  News  from  Quebec^  where  they  continue  to  make 
mighty  Preparations  for  fome  confiderable  Enterprife.  Time 
will  difcover  a  great  many  things,  an  Account  of  which  I  mean 
to  tranfmit  to  you  by  the  Ships  that  are  to  leave  this  Harbour 
in  the  end  oi  Autumn.    I  conclude  with  my  ufual  Compliment, 

Tours ^  &c. 


ii8  Some  New  Voyages 


LETTER    XII. 

Dated  at  St.  Helens^  over  againft  Monreal^^ 
June  8.  1687. 

The  Chevalier  de  Vaudreuil  arrives  in  Canada  with  fome  Troops. 
Both  the  Regular  Troops  and  the  Militia,  are  pofted  at  St. 
Helens,  in  a  readinefs  to  march  againft  the  Iroquefe 

SIR, 

I  HAVE  fuch  a  budget-full  of  News,  that  I  know  not  where 
to  begin.  I  receiv'd  Letters  but  now  from  Mr.  Senelay's 
Office ;  by  which  I  have  Advice,  that  Orders  are  fent  to  Mr. 
Denonville  to  allow  me  to  go  for  France,  upon  my  private 
Concerns.^  No  longer  fince  than  Yefterday,  he  told  me  I 
fhould  have  Leave  to  go  after  the  Campaign  is  over.  My 
Relations  write,  that  the  procuring  of  this  Leave  coft  'em  a 
great  deal  of  pains ;  and  that  the  fooner  I  come  to  Paris^ 
'twill  be  the  better  for  me. 

The  Governour  arriv'd  at  Monreal  three  or  four  days  ago, 


^  St.  Helen  Island,  in  the  St.  Lawrence  opposite  Montreal,  was  named  by  Cham- 
plain  in  honor  of  his  wife.  It  was  the  seigniory  of  Jacques  Le  Moyne,  sieur  de  Ste. 
Helene,  second  son  of  Longueuil,  who  distinguished  himself  in  the  opening  of  Fron- 
tenac's  War,  and  fell  at  the  siege  of  Quebec  (1690).  The  island,  where  the  troops 
rendezvoused  for  Denonville's  expedition,  is  now  a  public  park.  —  Ed. 

2  Jean  Baptiste  Colbert,  marquis  de  Selgnelay,  eldest  son  of  the  great  Colbert, 
succeeded  his  father  (1683)  as  minister  of  the  marine,  which  office  he  administered 
until  his  death  in  1690.  The  colonies  were  controlled  by  this  department  of  the 
French  administration.  —  Ed. 


to  North- A.vi\mc2i,  119 

with  all  the  Militia  of  the  Country,  who  lie  now  incamp'd 
along  with  our  Troops  in  that  Ifland.  Mr.  D'Amblemont  has 
been  at  Quebec  this  Month,  with  five  or  fix  fecond  Rate  Ships, 
having  [69]  fail'd  from  Rochel  thither  in  28  days.  He  brought 
over  with  him  ten  or  twelve  Companies  of  Marines,  who  are 
to  guard  the  Colony  while  we  invade  the  Iroquefe  Country.^ 
'Tis  faid,  that  laft  Year  Mr.  Denonville  fent  feveral  Canadefe, 
that  were  known  and  efteem'd  by  the  Savages,  our  Allies,  who 
live  upon  the  Banks  of  the  Lakes  and  the  adjacent  Countries, 
with  Orders  to  engage  'em  to  favour  our  Defign  of  extirpat- 
ing the  Iroquefe.  In  the  Winter  he  made  Magazines  of  Ammu- 
nition and  Provifions,  and  now  he  has  fent  feveral  Canows, 
laden  with  Provifions,  to  Fort  Frontenac,  and  given  Orders  for 
the  building  of  an  infinite  number  of  fuch  Boats  as  I  defcrib'd 
in  my  fourth  Letter,  for  the  Tranfporting  of  our  twenty  Com- 
panies of  Marines.  The  Militia  who  are  incamp'd  in  this 
Ifland  along  with  our  Troops,  make  fifteen  hundred  Men, 
and  are  join'd  by  five  hundred  of  the  converted  Savages  that 
live  in  the  Neighbourhood  of  Quebec  and  the  Ifland  of  Monreal. 
The  Chevalier  Faudreuil,  who  is  come  from  France  to  Com- 
mand our  Troops,  is  refolv'd  to  appear  in  the  Field,  notwith- 
flanding  the   Fatigue   of  his   Paffage   to   Canada^:    and   the 


1  D'Amblemont  commanded  the  royal  ships  sent  out  with  reinforcements.  There 
were  now  about  sixteen  hundred  regular  troops  in  the  colony.  —  Ed. 

2  Philippe  de  Rigaud,  Chevalier  de  Vaudreuil,  came  to  Canada  in  1687  as  com- 
mander of  the  king's  regiment.  Three  years  later  he  married  a  Canadian,  and  per- 
manently threw  in  his  fortunes  with  the  colony.  His  services  were  of  sufficient  value 
to  secure  him  a  marquisate  (1702),  when  he  was  appointed  governor  to  succeed  Cal- 
lieres.  an  office  held  until  his  death  in  1726.  His  son  was  the  last  French  governor 
of  Canada.  — Ed. 


120  Some  New  Voyages 

Governour  of  Monreal  is  of  the  fame  mind.  Mr.  de  Champigni, 
the  Intendant  of  this  Country,  went  from  hence  to  Fort  Fron- 
tenac  two  days  ago.  The  day  after  to  morrow,  Mr.  de  Denon- 
ville  means  to  march  at  the  Head  of  his  little  Army,  being 
accompany'd  with  an  ancient  Iroquefe,  that  is  very  much 
refpedled  by  the  five  Cantons.  The  Hiftory  and  various 
Adventures  of  this  old  Gentleman,  are  too  tedious  to  bear  a 
Relation  in  this  place.  Every  body  is  apprehenfive  that  this 
Expedition  will  prove  as  fucceflefs  as  that  of  Mr.  de  la  Barre: 
And  if  their  Apprehenfions  are  not  difappointed,  the  King 
lays  out  his  Money  to  no  purpofe.  For  my  own  part,  when 
I  refledl  upon  the  Attempt  we  made  three  Years  ago,  I  can't 
but  think  it  impoffible  for  us  to  fucceed.  Time  will  difcover 
the  Confequences  of  [70]  this  Expedition  ;  and  perhaps  we 
may  come  to  repent,  tho'  too  late,  of  our  complying  with  the 
Advice  of  fome  Difturbers  of  the  Publick  Peace,  who  projedt 
to  enlarge  their  private  Fortunes  in  a  general  Commotion.  I 
lay  this  down  for  an  uncontefled  Truth,  that  we  are  not  able 
to  deftroy  the  Iroquefe  by  our  felves :  befides,  what  occafion 
have  we  to  trouble  'em,  fince  they  give  us  no  Provocation? 
However,  let  the  Event  be  what  it  will,  I  fhall  not  fail  upon 
my  Return  to  tranfmit  you  a  Journal  of  our  A6lions,  unlefs  it 
be,  that  I  embarque  for  Rochel,  and  deliver  it  my  felf :  In  the 
mean  time,  believe  me  to  be, 

SIR, 

Tours,  &c. 


to  TVo/tZ?- America.  121 


LETTER    XIII. 

Dated  at  Niagara,  Aug.  2.  1687. 

Reprefent'tng  the  unfavourable  Iffue  of  the  Campaign  made  in  the 
Iroquefe  Country ;  the  Difcovery  of  an  Ambufcade ;  and  the 
iffuing  of  Orders  for  the  Author  to  march  with  a  Detachment 
to  the  great  Lakes. 

SIR, 

IT  has  been  a  Maxim  in  all  Ages,  That  the  Events  of  things 
are  not  always  anfwerable  to  Mens  Expedlations :  When 
Men  form  to  themfelves  a  promifing  profpedl  of  comparing 
their  Ends,  they  frequently  meet  with  the  mortification  of 
feeing  themfelves  difappointed.  This  I  fpeak  by  way  of 
application  to  my  felf ;  for  inftead  of  going  for  France,  pur- 
fuant  to  the  Contents  of  the  Letter  I  writ  to  you  [71]  two 
Months  ago,  I  am  now  oblig'd  to  ftraggle  to  one  End  of  the 
World,  as  you'll  find  by  the  following  Journal  of  our  Expe- 
dition. 

We  broke  up  from  5/.  Helens  much  about  the  time  I  fpoke 
of  in  my  laft.  Mr.  de  Champigni  went  before  us  with  a  ftrong 
Guard,  and  arriv'd  in  a  Canow  at  Fort  Frontenac,  eight  or  ten 
days  before  we  came  up.  As  foon  as  he  arriv'd,  he  fent  two 
or  three  hundred  Canadefe  to  furprife  the  Villages  of  Kente  and 
Ganeouffe,  which  lie  at  the  diftance  of  feven  or  eight  Leagues 


122  Some  New  Voyages 

from  the  Fort,  and  are  inhabited  by  a  fort  of  Iroquefe,  that 
deferv'd  no  other  Ufage  than  what  they  met  with.  Our  Cana- 
defe  had  no  great  difficulty  in  maftering  them ;  for  they  fur- 
pris'd  'em  when  they  leaft  thought  of  any  Alarm,  and  brought 
'em  Prifoners  to  Fort  Frontenac,  where  they  were  tied  to  Pofts 
with  Cords  round  their  Necks,  Hands,  and  Feet.  We  arriv'd 
at  the  Fort  on  the  firft  of  July,  after  the  encountering  of  fev- 
eral  Difficulties  among  the  Water-falls,  Cataradls,  and  Currents, 
that  I  formerly  defcrib'd  to  you  in  my  Account  of  Mr.  de  la 
Barrels  Expedition.  We  were  more  perplex'd  in  this  Voyage 
than  the  former ;  for  our  Boats  were  fo  heavy,  that  we  could 
not  tranfport  'em  over  Land  as  v/e  did  the  Canows,  but  were 
oblig'd  to  drag  'em  up  through  the  impracticable  Paffes  with 
the  force  of  Men  and  Ropes.  Immediately  upon  our  De- 
barquing,  I  went  ftraight  to  the  Fort,  where  I  faw  the  miferable 
Prifoners  in  the  abovemention'd  Pofture.  The  fight  of  this 
piece  of  Tyranny  fiU'd  me  at  once  with  Compaffion  and  Hor- 
ror ;  but  in  the  mean  time  the  poor  Wretches  fung  Night 
and  Day,  that  being  the  cuftomary  Pradice  of  the  People  of 
Canada  when  they  fall  into  the  hands  of  their  Enemies.  They 
complain'd,  'That  they  were  betray'd  without  any  ground; 
'  that  in  compenfation  for  the  care  they  had  took  ever  fince 
'  the  Peace  to  furnifh  the  Garrifon  with  Fifli  and  Venifon,  they 
'were  bound  and  [72]  tied  to  Pofl:s,  and  whip'd  in  fuch  a 
'  manner,  that  they  could  neither  deep,  nor  guard  off  the  Flies; 
'  that  the  only  Requital  they  met  with  for  procuring  to  the 
'  French  a  Commerce  in  the  Skins  of  Beavers  and  other  Ani- 
'  mals,  was,  to  be  doom'd  to  Slavery,  and  to  fee  their  Fathers, 


to  TVor^Z'- America.  123 

'  and  the  ancient  Men  of  their  Country,  murder'd  before  their 
'  eyes.  Are  thefe  the  French^  faid  they,  that  the  Jefiiits  cry'd 
*  up  fo  much  for  Men  of  Probity  and  Honour?  Even  the 
'  cruelleft  fort  of  Death  that  Imagination  it  felf  can  reach, 
'  would  be  nothing  to  us  in  comparifon  with  the  odious  and 
'  horrible  Spedacle  of  the  Blood  of  our  Anceftors,  that  is  fhed 
'  fo  inhumanely  before  our  eyes.  Affuredly,  the  five  Villages 
'  will  revenge  our  Quarrel,  and  entertain  an  everlafting  and 
'  juft  Refentment  of  the  tyrannical  Ufage  we  now  meet  with.' 
I  made  up  to  one  of  thefe  Wretches  that  was  about  five  and 
twenty  Years  old,  and  had  frequently  regal'd  me  in  his  Hutt, 
not  far  from  the  Fort,  during  my  fix  Weeks  Service  in  that 
Place  in  the  Year  of  Mr.  de  la  Barrels  Expedition.  This  poor 
Man  being  Mafl:er  of  the  Algonkin  Language,  I  gave  him  to 
know,  that  I  was  heartily  griev'd  to  fee  him  in  that  difmal 
Pofture ;  that  I  would  take  care  to  have  Victuals  and  Drink 
convey'd  to  him  twice  a  day,  and  would  give  him  Letters  for 
my  Friends  at  Monreal,  in  order  to  his  being  us'd  more  favour- 
ably than  his  Companions.  He  reply'd,  That  he  faw  and  was 
very  well  acquainted  with  the  Horror  that  moft  of  the  French 
were  affeded  with,  upon  the  view  of  the  Cruelty  they  under- 
went ;  and,  that  he  fcorn'd  to  be  fed,  or  us'd  more  civily  than 
his  Fellow  Prifoners.  He  gave  me  an  account  of  the  manner 
in  which  they  were  furpris'd,  and  how  their  Anceftors  were  maf- 
facred  ;  and  truly,  I  do  not  believe  that  any  one  can  be  touch'd 
with  more  cutting  and  bitter  Reflexions  than  this  poor  Man 
was,  when  he  recounted  the  many  Services  he  had  done  the 
French,  during  [73]  the  whole  courfe  of  his  Life  :  At  lafl:,  after 


124  Some  New  Voyages 

many  Sighs  and  Groans,  he  bow'd  down  his  Head,  and  wrap'd 
himfelf  up  in  Silence.  Qiiaque  poteft  narrate  reftabant  ultima  flevit. 
But  this  was  not  the  only  thing  that  affedled  me,  when  I  beheld 
the  mifery  of  thefe  innocent  Creatures  :  I  faw  fome  young 
Savages  of  our  fide  burn  their  Fingers  with  Fire  in  their 
lighted  Pipes ;  which  provok'd  me  to  threfh  'em  foundly :  but 

I  was  feverely  reprimanded  for  my  pains,  and  confin'd  to  my 
Tent  for  five  or  fix  days,  where  I  only  repented  that  I  had  not 
dealt  my  blows  in  a  double  meafure.  Thefe  Savages  refented 
the  matter  fo  highly,  that  they  ran  prefently  to  their  Hutts, 
and  flew  to  their  Fufees,  in  order  to  kill  me.  Nay,  all  that 
could  be  done  was  fcarce  fufficient  to  appeafe  'em ;  for  the 
Difpute  came  to  that  heighth,  that  they  would  have  left  us,  if 

,,  ^  ,    _  it  had  not  been  that  our  Men  affur'd  'em 

I I  Among  the  ravages, 

drunken  Perfons  are  ^  ^^^  H  drunk,  that  all  the  French  were  pro- 
always  excused:  for,  hibited  to  give  me  either  Wine  or  Brandy, 
the  Bottle  attones  for     j^^d  that  I  fhould  certainly  be  imprifon'd  as 

all  Crimes.  r  ^l      r^  •  tt 

ioon  as  the  Campaign  were  over.  How- 
ever, the  poor  Wretches,  the  Prifoners,  were  carried  to  Quebec; 
from  whence  they  are  to  be  fent  to  the  French  Galleys.^  Much 
about  that  time,  the  Sieur  de  la  Forejl,  one  of  the  Mr.  de  la  Salle's 
Officers,  arriv'd  at  the  Fort  in  a  great  Canow,  being  conduded 


^  For  the  treacherous  action  of  Denonville  in  seizing  these  friendly  Iroquois, 
reprisals  were  made  on  the  colony.  See  Parkman,  Frontenac,  pp.  167-183.  Thirty- 
six  were  shipped  to  France  as  the  first  installment  for  the  royal  galleys.  See  Jes.  Rel., 
Ixiii,  p.  281.  The  remnant  that  survived  were  reprieved  and  sent  back  under  Fron- 
tenac's  care  (1689).  See  list  in  Colleciio?i  de  Manuscrits  relatifs  a  la  Nowvelle 
France  (Quebec,  1883),  i,  p.  454.  The  French  edition  of  Lahontan  gives  a  more 
extended  and  vivid  narration  of  his  own  peril  upon  this  occasion.  —  Ed. 


7rv 


/•  ■■^7 


to  North' A.mmc2i,  125 

thither  by  eight  or  ten  Coureurs  de  Bots}  He  gave  Mr.  de 
Denonville  to  underftand,  that  a  Party  of  the  lUinefe  and  the 
Onmamis  waited  for  the  Hiirons  and  the  Outaouas  at  the  Lake 
of  St.  Claire^  in  order  to  joyn  'em,  and  to  march  with  joint 
Forces  to  the  River  of  the  Tfonontouans^  that  being  the  place 
of  their  general  Rendezvous.^  He  added,  that  in  the  Lake  of 
the  Hurons  near  Mijfilimakinac^  Mr.  de  la  Durantais,^  afTifted  by 
the  Savages,  our  Allies,  had  taken  an  Englifli  Company  con- 
dueled  by  fome  Iroquefe,  who  had  fifty  [74]  thoufand  Crowns- 
worth  of  Goods  in  their  Canows,  to  be  difpos'd  of  in  exchange 


1  Franfois  Dauphine,  sieur  de  la  Forest,  was  one  of  La  Salle's  trusted  lieuten- 
ants. Born  in  1648,  he  arrived  in  the  colony  with  his  chief  (1675),  who  left  him 
(1678)  in  charge  of  Fort  Frontenac.  Thence  he  was  summoned  (1680-81)  to  accom- 
pany La  Salle  and  carry  succor  to  Illinois.  In  1683,  his  fort  was  treacherously  seized 
by  La  Barre,  La  Forest  being  offered  the  command  if  he  would  forsake  La  Salle's 
interests.  He  preferred  to  seek  redress  in  France,  where  an  order  was  issued  restoring 
all  to  him,  in  trust  for  his  absent  chief.  In  1685,  he  was  relieved  of  Fort  Frontenac, 
and  joined  Tonty  in  Illinois,  whence  he  issued  to  aid  this  expedition.  In  1690 
La  Forest  and  Tonty  received  a  grant  of  Fort  St.  Louis,  in  Illinois;  this  being 
revoked  in  1702.  La  Forest  then  became  La  Mothe's  lieutenant  at  Detroit,  and  in 
1710  was  appointed  commandant  of  this  post,  which  position  he  held  until  1714, 
dying  at  Boucherville  five  years  later.  —  Ed 

2  As  the  sequel  shows,  the  rendezvous  was  at  Irondequoit  Bay,  Monroe  County, 
N.  Y.  The  "River  of  the  Tsonontouans  "  was  Irondequoit  Creek,  a  highway 
toward  the  towns  of  that  nation.  —  Ed. 

3  Olivier  Morel  dc  la  Durantaye,  born  at  Nantes  in  1641,  came  to  Canada  with 
the  regiment  de  Carignan.  A  brief  contemporary  biography  {Can.  Arch.,  1899, 
Supp.,  p.  26)  is  as  follows:  "In  1662,  ensign;  in  1665,  captain;  in  1663,  com- 
mandant over  the  Ottau-a  country  by  order  of  the  Court;  in  1689,  captain  on  half- 
pay  in  Canada  ;  in  1694,  captain  enpied  in  that  country,  where  he  has  settled.  A 
good  officer.  An  honest  man  ;  ready  for  any  service  ;  entitled  to  a  company."  After 
retiring  from  his  command  at  Mackinac  (1683-89),  he  aided  in  Frontenac's  War, 
and  was  esteemed  the  first  soldier  in  the  colony.  He  died  in  1717,  leaving  descend- 
ants who  still  live  in  Canada.  — Ed. 


126  Some  New  Voyages 

with  the  Nations  that  dwell  upon  thefe  Lakes:  as  alfo,  That 
Mr.  Dulhut  had  taken  another  Eugli/h  Convoy,  being  affifted 
by  the  Coureurs  de  Bois,  and  the  Savages,  who  had  fhar'd  the 
former  Capture  ;  and  that  he  had  kept  the  EngUjJi  and  Iroquefe 
as  Prifoners,  as  well  as  their  Commander,  who  was  call'd  Major 
Gregory.^  In  fine,  he  reprefented  to  Mr.  de  Denonville,  that 
'twas  high  time  for  him  to  fet  out  from  Fort  Frontenac,  if  he 
mean'd  to  appear  at  the  general  Rendezvous,  where  the  Aux- 
iliary Troops  fent  from  the  Lakes  would  arrive  very  fpeedily. 
The  next  day,  being  the  3d  of  July,  the  Sieur  de  la  Foreft  em- 
barqued  again  for  Niagara,  and  fteer'd  to  the  North-fide  of 
the  Lake.  At  the  fame  time  we  embarqued,  and  ftood  to  the 
oppofite  fide  of  the  Lake,  being  favour'd  by  the  Calms  which 
in  that  Month  are  very  common. 

By  good  luck,  our  whole  Body  arriv'd  almoft  at  one  and 
the  fame  time  in  the  River  of  the  Tfonontouans ;  and  upon  that 
occafion,  the  Savages,  our  Allies,  who  draw  Predi<5lions  from 
the  moft  trifling  Accidents,  (hew'd  their  wonted  Superftition 
in  taking  this  for  an  infallible  Prefage  of  the  utter  Deftrudlion 
of  the  Iroquefe :  tho'  after  all  they  prov'd  falfe  Prophets,  as 
you  will  find  by  the  fequel  of  this  Letter.  The  fame  Night 
that  we  Landed,  we  hawl'd  our  Canows  and  Boats  out  of  the 
Water,  and  fet  a  fl:rong  Guard  upon  'em.     This  done,  we 

1  For  an  account  of  the  capture  of  the  English  and  Dutch  traders  commissioned 
by  Dongan,  see  Parkman,  Frontenac,  pp.  145-147;  A^.  Y.  Colon.  Docs.,  ix, 
pp.  318-322,  363.  Colonel  Patrick  MacGregory  emigrated  with  a  colony  from  Scot- 
land to  Maryland,  in  1684;  later,  he  removed  to  New  York  and  engaged  in  the 
Indian  trade.  He  was  released  from  imprisonment  and  sent  back  to  New  York  in 
the  autumn  of^687,  and  next  year  was  employed  against  the  Indians  in  Maine.  He 
was  killed  during  the  Leisier  rebellion  in  New  York,  1691 .  —  Ed. 


to  North' h.vi\tx\Q.2i,  127 

built  a  Fort  of  Stakes  or  Pales,  where  we  left  the  Sieur  Dor- 
villers  with  four  hundred  Men  to  guard  our  Shipping  and 
Baggage.^  The  next  day,  a  young  Canadefe,  call'd  Fontaine 
Marion  was  unjuftly  fhot  to  death.  His  cafe  flood  thus  :  Hav- 
ing travell'd  frequently  all  over  this  Continent,  he  was  perfedly 
well  acquainted  with  the  Country,  and  with  the  Savages  of 
Canada;  and  after  the  doing  of  feveral  good  Services  to  the 
King,  defir'd  Leave  from  the  Governour  general  to  continue 
[75]  his  Travels,  in  order  to  carry  on  fome  little  Trade:  but 
his  Requeft  was  never  granted.  Upon  that  he  refolv'd  to 
remove  to  New  England^  the  two  Crowns  being  then  in  Peace. 
The  Planters  of  New  England  gave  him  a  very  welcome 
Reception ;  for  he  was  an  adlive  Fellow,  and  one  that  under- 
ftood  almoft  all  the  Languages  of  the  Savages.  Upon  this 
Confideration  he  was  employ'd  to  conduct  the  two  Englifh 
Convoys  I  fpoke  of  but  now,  and  had  the  Misfortune  to  be 
taken  along  with  them.  Now,  to  my  mind,  the  Ufage  he  met 
with  from  us  was  extream  hard  ;  for,  we  are  in  Peace  with 
England:  and  befides,  that  Crown  lays  Claim  to  the  Property 
of  the  Lakes  of  Canada. 

The  next  Day  we  began  our  March  towards  the  great 
Village  of  the  Tfonontouans,  without  any  other  Provifions  than 
ten   Biskets  a   Man,   which   every  one   carry'd   for  himfelf.^ 

1  Franfois  Chore!,  sieur  de  St.  Romain  dit  d'  Orvilliers,  was  born  near  Lyons  in 
1639,  came  to  Canada  about  1660,  and  was  prominent  in  military  affairs  in  the  colony 
until  his  death  in  1709.  Denonvilie  placed  him  in  charge  of  Fort  Frontenac  (1685- 
87),  and  he  commanded  in  person  one  division  of  his  expedition.  —  Ed. 

^  The  great  village  of  the  Seneca  was  situated  in  Ontario  County,  just  south  of 
the  present  town  of  Victor.  See  map  in  Cayuga  County  Historical  Society  Collections, 
iii,  znAJes.  Rel.,  li,  p.  293.  —  Ed. 


128  Some  New  Voyages 

We  had  but  feven  Leagues  to  march  in  a  great  Wood  of  tall 
Trees,  upon  a  fmooth  even  Ground.  The  Coureurs  de  Bois, 
with  a  Party  of  the  Savages,  led  the  Van,  and  the  reft  of  the 
Savages  brought  up  the  Rear,  our  Regular  Troops  and  our 
Militia  being  pofted  in  the  middle.  The  firft  Day  the  Army 
march'd  four  Leagues,  and  the  advanc'd  Guards  made  no 
Difcovery.  The  fecond  Day  our  advanc'd  Parties  march'd  up 
to  the  very  Fields  of  the  Village  without  perceiving  any  thing, 
tho'  they  paft  within  a  Piftol-fhot  of  five  hundred  Tfonontou- 
anSy  who  lay  flat  upon  the  Ground,  and  fufifer'd  'em  to  pafs 
and  repafs  without  moleftation.  Upon  their  Intelligence  we 
march'd  up  with  equal  Precipitation  and  Confufion,  being 
bouy'd  up  with  the  Apprehenfion  that  the  Iroqiiefe  had  fled, 
and  that  at  leaft  their  Women,  Children,  and  fuperannuated 
Perfons  would  fall  into  our  hands.  When  we  arriv'd  at  the 
bottom  of  the  Hill  upon  which  the  Ambufcade  was  plac'd,  at 
the  diftance  of  a  quarter  of  a  League  from  the  Village,  they 
began  to  raife  their  wonted  Cry,  which  [76]  was  follow'd  by 
the  firing  of  fome  Muskets.  Had  you  but  feen.  Sir,  what 
Diforder  our  Troops  and  Militia  were  In  amidft  the  thick 
Trees,  you  would  have  joyn'd  with  me,  in  thinking  that  fev- 
eral  thoufands  of  Europeans  are  no  more  than  a  fufiicient 
number  to  make  head  againft  five  hundred  Barbarians.  Our 
Battalions  were  divided  into  ftraggling  Parties,  who  fell  in  to 
the  right  and  left,  without  knowing  where  they  went.  Inftead 
of  firing  upon  the  Iroquefe^  we  fir'd  upon  one  another.  'Twas 
to  no  purpofe  to  call  in  the  Soldiers  of  fuch  and  fuch  a  Battal- 
ion, for  we  could  not  fee  thirty  Paces  ofi^ :  In  fine,  we  were  fo 


to  Nortb-Kvamc^,  129 

diforder'd,  that  the  Enemy  were  going  to  clofe  in  upon  us 
with  their  Clubs  in  their  hands ;  when  the  Savages  of  our 
fide  having  rally'd,  repuls'd  the  Enemy,  and  purfu'd  'em  to 
their  Villages  with  fo  much  fury,  that  they  brought  off  the 
Heads  of  eighty,  and  wounded  a  great  many.  In  this  Adion 
we  loft  ten  Savages,  and  a  hundred  French :  We  had  twenty 
or  two  and  twenty  wounded,  in  which  number  was  the  good 
Father  Angeleran  the  Jefuit,^  who  receiv'd  a  Musket-fhot  in 
thofe  Parts  which  Origen  chofe  to  lop  off,  in  order  to  qualify 
himfelf  for  inftruding  the  Fair  Sex  without  the  difturbance  of 
Paffion,  or  the  danger  of  Scandal.  When  the  Savages  brought 
in  the  Heads  of  their  Enemies  to  Mr.  de  Denonville,  they  ask'd 
him  why  he  halted,  and  did  not  march  up?  He  made  Anfwer, 
That  he  could  not  leave  his  wounded  Men  behind,  and  that 
he  thought  it  proper  to  encamp,  that  the  Surgeons  might 
have  time  to  drefs  their  Wounds.  To  obviate  this  Pretence, 
the  Savages  offer'd  to  make  Litters  for  the  tranfporting  of 
'em  to  the  Village  that  lay  but  a  little  way  off.  But  our 
General  did  not  approve  of  their  Advice ;  upon  which,  not- 
withftanding  his  Remonftrances,  they  drew  up  into  a  Body, 
and  tho'  they  confifted  of  ten  different  Nations,  agreed  in  a 
joynt  Refolution  of  purfuing  their  Enemy,  in  hopes  of  taking, 
at  [77]  leaft  their  Women,  their  Old-men,  and  their  Children. 


^  Father  Jean  Enjalran  (born  in  1639)  came  to  Canada  in  1676,  and  the  follow- 
ing year  was  sent  to  the  Ottawa  mission  at  Mackinac,  where  he  remained  until  1688, 
acting  as  superior  of  Ottawa  missions  for  the  last  seven  years.  He  had  been  instru- 
mental in  persuading  the  savages  to  join  this  expedition.  The  next  year  (1688)  he 
went  to  France,  but  was  again  in  Canada  until  1701,  when  he  returned  to  his  native 
land  for  the  last  time,  and  died  there  in  1718.  —  Ed. 
9 


I30  Some  New  Voyages 

Our  General  being  acquainted  with  their  Refolution,  gave  'em 
to  know,  that  he  earneftly  defir'd  they  would  reft  for  one  day, 
and  not  depart  from  his   Camp,  and  that  the  next  day  he 
would  burn  their  Villages,  and  ftarve  'em  to  Death  by  fpoiling 
their  Crops.     But  they  took  this  Compliment  fo  ill,  that  moft 
of  'em  return'd  to  their  own  Country ;  remonftrating,  *  That 
'  the  French  came  out  to  fetch  a  Walk,  rather  than  to  wage 
'  War,  fmce  they  v/ould  not  take  the  Advantage  of  the  beft 
'Opportunity  in  the  World :  That  their  Ardour,  like  a  flafh 
'  of  Fire,  v/as  ext'inguifh'd  as  foon  as  kindled  :  That  'twas  a 
'fruitlefs  Adventure,  to  draw  together  fo  many  Warriours, 
'  from  all  Parts,  to  burn  fome  Hutts  of  Bark,  that  the  Enemy 
'  could  rebuild  in  four  days :  That  the  TJonontouans  did  not 
'  matter  the  fpoiling  of  their  Corn,  for  that  the  other  Iroqueje 
'  Nations  were  able  to  fupply  'em :  And  in  fine,  That  fmce 
'  they  had  joyn'd  the  French  twice  together  to  no  purpofe, 
'  they  would  never  truft  'em  for  the  future,  in  fpite  of  all  the 
Remonftrances  they  could  make.'     Some  are  of  the  opinion, 
that  Mr.  de  Denonville  ought  to  have  gone  farther  ;  and  others 
affirm,  that  'twas  impoffible  for  him  to  do  more  than  he  did. 
For  my  part,  I  ftiall  not  venture  upon  any  Decifion  of  the  matter ; 
thofe  who  fit  at  the  Helm  are  moft  liable  to  be  perplex'd.    To 
purfue  the  bare  matter  of  Fa6t;  we  march'd  next  day  to  the 
great  Village,  and  carry'd  our  wounded  Men  upon  Litters  :  but 
we  found  nothing  there  but  Afhes  ;  for  the  Iroquefe  had  burnt 
the  Village  themfelves,  by  way  of  Precaution.    Then  we  fpent 
five  or  fix  days  in  cutting  down  the  Indian  Corn  with  our 
Swords.     From  thence  we  march'd  to  the  two  little  Villages 


to  7Vor^Z>- America.  131 

of  the  Thegaronhies  and  the  Danortcaritaoui,  which  lay  about 
two  or  three  Leagues  off.^  Having  done  the  hke  Exploits 
there,  we  return'd  to  the  Lake  fide.  In  all  thefe  Villages  we 
[78]  found  plenty  of  Horfes,  black  Cattel,  Fowl,  and  Hogs. 
All  the  Country  round  aflForded  us  a  very  charming,  pleafant, 
and  even  Profpedl.  The  Forefts  thro  which  we  march'd  were 
replenifh'd  with  Oak,  Wall-nut,  and  wild  Chef  nut-Trees. 

Two  days  after  we  imbarqu'd  for  A^i^^^r^ ,  which  lay  thirty 
Leagues  off,  and  arriv'd  there  in  four  days.  As  foon  as  the 
Troops  had  debarqu'd,  we  imploy'd  'em  in  making  a  Fort  of 
Pales  with  four  Baftions,  which  was  finifh'd  in  three  days.^ 
Here  we  mean  to  leave  120  Soldiers  under  the  command  of 
Mr.  des  Bergeres,  with  Ammunition  and  Provifions  for  eight 
Months.''  The  Fort  flands  on  the  South  fide  of  the  Streight 
of  Henie  Lake,  upon  a  Hill ;  at  the  foot  of  which,  that  Lake 
falls  into  the  Lake  of  Frontenac.     Yefterday  the  Savages  our 


^  These  villages  were  in  the  vicinity  of  Honeoye  Falls,  Monroe  County,  N.  Y. 
See  Hawley,  "Jesuit  Missions  among  the  Senecas,"  in  Cayuga  Co.  Hist.  Soc.  Col- 
lections, iii,  pp.  25,  26.  —  Ed. 

2  It  had  long  been  a  favorite  plan  of  the  leaders  of  New  France  to  place  a  fort  at 
Niagara,  and  thus  intercept  the  fur-trade  which  passed  through  the  Great  Lakes  to 
the  Iroquois  and  English.  La  Salle  built  a  block  house  on  this  site  in  1679,  which 
was  destroyed  by  the  Senecas;  see  Hennepin,  Nenu  Disco'very.  Dongan  (1686) 
complained  that  Denonville  was  planning  to  build  "  a  fort  at  Ohinagero  on  this  side 
the  lake,  within  my  Master's  territories  without  question."  N.  Y.  Colon.  Docs.,  iii, 
p.  455.  Denonville  ordered  the  demolition  of  this  fort,  Sept.  15,  r688.  A  permanent 
French  fort  was  begun  on  this  site  in  1726,  being  captured  by  the  English  (1759), 
and  later  surrendered  to  the  Americans  (1796).  See  Severance,  Old  Trails  on  the 
Niagara  Frontier  (Buffalo,  1899).  —  Ed. 

'  Chevalier  de  Troyes  was  left  first  in  command  at  this  fort,  where  he  died  in  the 
following  year.  See  A'^.  Y.  Colon.  Docs.,  ix,  pp.  335,  368,  396.  Raymond  Blaise 
des  Bergeres,  sieur  de  Rigauville,  was  captain  of  a  company  stationed  at  Niagara; 
later  he  was  major  at  Three  Rivers.   His  son  commanded  at  Niagara  (1732-36),— Ed, 


132  Some  New  Voyages 

Allies  took  leave  of  Mr.  de  Denonville^  and  made  a  Speech  after 
their  ufual  manner ;  in  which,  among  other  things,  they  infinu- 
ated,  That  they  were  pleas'd  to  fee  a  Fort  fo  conveniently 
plac'd,  which  might  favour  their  retreat  upon  any  Expedition 
againfl  the  Iroquefe ;  That  they  depended  upon  his  promife, 
of  continuing  the  War  till  the  five  Nations  fhould  be  either 
deftroy'd  or  difpoffefs'd  of  their  Country;  That  they  earneftly 
defir'd  that  part  of  the  Army  fhould  take  the  Field  out  of  hand, 
and  continue  in  it  both  Winter  and  Summer,  for  that  they 
would  certainly  do  the  fame  on  their  part ;  and  in  fine,  That 
for  as  much  as  their  Alliance  with  France  was  chiefly  grounded 
upon  the  promifes  the  French  made  of  liftening  to  no  Pro- 
pofals  of  Peace,  till  the  five  Nations  fhould  be  quite  extirpated; 
they  therefore  hop'd  they  would  be  as  good  as  their  Word  ; 
efpecially  confidering  that  a  Ceffation  of  Arms  would  fully 
the  honour  of  the  French,  and  infallibly  difengage  their  AUies. 
Mr.  de  Denonville  gave  them  frefh  affurances  of  his  intention 
to  carry  on  the  War,  in  fpite  of  all  the  efforts  of  the  Iroquefe; 
and  in  a  [79]  word,  protefted  that  he  would  profecute  this 
defign  fo  vigoroufly,  that  in  the  end  thefe  Barbarians  fhould 
be  either  quite  cut  off,  or  oblig'd  to  fhift  their  Seats. 

The  General  call'd  for  me  that  very  day,  and  acquainted 
me,  that  in  regard  I  underflood  the  Language  of  the  Savages, 
I  was  to  go  with  a  Detachment  to  cover  their  Country  pur- 
fuant  to  their  Requefl.  At  the  fame  time  he  affur'd  me,  he 
would  inform  the  Court  of  the  Reafons  that  mov'd  him  to 
detain  me  in  Canada,  nothwithflanding  that  he  had  orders  to 
give  me  leave  to  go  home.     You  may  eafily  guefs,  Sir,  that  I 


to  iVo;Y/6- America.  133 

was  thunderftruck  with  thefe  News,  when  I  had  fed  my  felf 
all  along  with  the  hopes  of  returning  to  France^  and  promoting 
my  Intereft,  which  is  now  fo  much  thwarted.  However,  I  was 
forc'd  to  be  contented  ;  for  the  greater  Power  bears  the  fway 
all  the  World  over.  Purfuant  to  my  orders,  I  made  all  fuit- 
able  preparations  for  my  Voyage,  without  lofs  of  time.  I  took 
leave  of  my  Friends,  who  fingled  out  the  beft  Soldiers  for  me; 
and  made  me  Prefents  of  Cloaths,  Tobacco,  Books,  and  an 
infinity  of  other  things,  that  they  could  fpare  without  any 
inconveniency,  becaufe  they  were  then  upon  their  return  to 
the  Colony,  which  affords  every  thing  that  one  can  defire.  By 
good  luck,  I  brought  my  Aftrolabe  with  me  from  Monreal, 
which  will  enable  me  to  take  the  Latitudes  of  this  Lake,  and  to 
make  feveral  other  ufeful  Obfervations;  for  in  all  appearance, 
I  fhall  be  out  two  years  or  fuch  a  matter.  The  Men  of  my 
Detachment  are  brisk  proper  fellows,  and  my  Canows  are 
both  new  and  large.  I  am  to  go  along  with  Mr.  Dulhut^  a 
Lions  Gentleman,  who  is  a  Perfon  of  great  Merit,  and  has  done 
his  King  and  his  Country  very  confiderable  Services.  Mr.  de 
Tonti  makes  another  of  our  Company^;  and  a  Company  of 
Savages  is  to  follow  us.     Mr.  de  Denonville  will  fet  out  [80] 


^  Henry  de  Tonty  was  a  Neapolitan,  whose  father  invented  the  insurance  systeiTi 
called  from  his  name,  "tontine."  Tonty  entered  the  French  service  at  the  age  of 
eighteen,  and  won  distinction  in  the  army,  where  he  lost  one  of  his  hands.  In  1677 
he  met  La  Salle,  and  embarked  on  his  enterprise  of  discovery,  accompanied  him  to 
the  Illinois,  and  there  took  command  of  Fort  St.  Louis.  After  La  Salle's  death  this 
fort  was  granted  to  Tonty  and  La  Forest  as  a  seigniory,  and  there  for  ten  years  or  more 
they  held  command.  Tonty  assisted  Cadillac  in  founding  Detroit  (1701),  after  which 
he  was  ordered  to  aid  Iberville  in  Louisiana,  where  he  died  of  yellow  fever  in  1704. 
See  Legler,  "  Henry  de  Tonty,"  Parkman  Club  Papers  (Milwaukee,  1896).  —  Ed. 


134  Some  New  Voyages 

for  the  Colony  by  the  North  fide  of  the  Lake  of  Frontenac, 
in  two  or  three  days.  He  defigns  to  leave  at  Fort  Frontenac,  a 
number  of  Men  and  Ammunition  equal  to  what  he  leaves  here. 
I  herewith  tranfmit  fome  Letters  for  my  Relations,  which  I  beg 
you  would  convey  to  their  Hands.  If  I  meet  with  any  oppor- 
tunity, I'll  fend  you  a  Journal  of  my  Voyage  the  next  year.    In 

the  mean  time,  I  am, 

SIR, 

Tours,  &c. 


to  North- hmQ.x\Q.2.,  135 


LETTER    XIV. 

Dated  at  MiJJilimakinac  May  26.  1688. 

The  Author  leaves  Niagara,  and  has  an  Incounter  with  the  Iro- 
quefe  at  the  end  of  the  Land-Carriage.  The  after  part  of  his 
Voyage.  A  Defcription  of  the  Country.  He  arrives  at  Fort  St. 
Jofeph  in  the  Mouth  of  the  Lake  of  Hurons.  A  Detachment 
of  the  Hurons  arrive  at  the  fame  place.  After  an  Ingagement^ 
they  fet  out  for  Miflilimakinac.  A  firange  Adventure  of  Mr. 
de  la  Salle's  Brother.     MifTilimakinac  defcrib'd. 

SIR, 

I  AM  at  a  lofs  to  determine  whether  'tis  owing  to  Stupidity, 
or  greatnefs  of  Mind,  that  the  lofs  of  my  Eftate,  which  I 
infallibly  forefee,  do's  not  at  all  affed  me.  Your  Letter  is  but 
too  fhrewd  a  confirmation  of  my  Prophecy :  However,  I  can- 
not but  purfue  your  feafonable  advice  in  writing  to  Court; 
[81]  in  the  meantime  fuflrer  me  to  fatisfie  my  promife,  in  pre- 
fenting  you  with  a  relation  of  my  Voyages. 

I  imbarqued  at  Niagara  Augufl  3.  on  board  a  Canow 
mann'd  with  eight  Soldiers  of  my  Detachment;  and  after  run- 
ning three  Leagues  againft  the  Current  of  the  Streight,  came 
that  fame  day  to  the  place  where  the  Navigation  ftops.  There 
I  met  with  the  -Sieur  Grifolon  de  la  Tourette,  Brother  to  Mr. 
Dulhut,  who  had  ventur'd  to  come  from  Miffdimakinac  with  a 


136  Some  New  Voyages 

fingle  Canow  to  joyn  the  Army.^  The  ^th  we  commenc'd  our 
great  Land-Carriage  to  the  Southward,  being  oblig'd  to  tranf- 
port  our  Canows  from  a  League  and  a  half  below  the  great 
Fall  of  Niagara,  to  half  a  League  above  it.  Before  we  got  at 
any  beaten  or  level  Path,  we  were  forc'd  to  climb  up  three 
Mountains,  upon  which  an  hundred  Iroquefe  might  have 
knock'd  us  all  on  the  head  with  Stones.^  While  we  were 
imploy'd  in  this  tranfport  Service,  we  were  alarm'd  twice  or 
thrice;  which  caution'd  us  to  keep  a  ftri6t  guard,  and  to  tranf- 
port our  Baggage  with  all  poflible  Expedition :  Nay,  after  all 
our  precautions  we  were  forc'd  to  leave  one  half  of  our  Bag- 
gage about  half  way,  upon  the  difcovery  of  a  thoufand  Iroquefe 
that  march'd  towards  us.  Do  you  judge.  Sir,  if  we  had  not 
fome  reafon  to  be  alarm'd  ;  and  whether  we  would  ftand  to 
Sacrifice  all  to  the  natural  principle  of  Self  prefervation ;  tho' 
indeed  we  were  in  danger  of  lofing  our  Lives  as  well  as  our 
Baggage :  for  v/e  had  not  imbarqued  above  the  Fall  half  a 
quarter  of  an  hour,  when  the  Enemy  appear'd  upon  the 
Streight  fide.  I  affure  you,  I  'fcap'd  very  narrowly;  for  about 
a  quarter  of  an  hour  before,  I  and  three  or  four  Savages  had 


1  Claude  Greysolon  de  la  Tourette,  younger  brother  of  Duluth,  assisted  him  in 
all  his  adventures,  and  ably  seconded  his  measures.  In  1678  he  accompanied  him  to 
the  upper  country,  and  when  Duluth  built  the  fort  on  Lake  Nipigon  (1683),  he  named 
it  La  Tourette  and  placed  his  brother  in  charge.  Their  uncle  patron  bequeathed  his 
possessions  to  the  younger  nephew  in  1691,  and  at  the  time  of  Duluth's  death,  La 
Tourette  was  living  in  Lyons,  France.  The  report  which  he  made  to  Denonville  after 
this  encounter  with  Lahontan,  is  found  in  N.  T.  Colon.  Docs.,  ix,  p.  343.  —  Ed. 

2  For  a  description  of  the  "  three  Mountains,"  which  are  the  three  levels  of  the 
clifl  above  Lewiston,  see  Parkman,  La  Salle,  p.  132,  note.  Hennepin  first  described 
the  portage  path  ;  see  Nenv  Discovery,  pp.  103,  104,  324.  —  Ed. 


to  iV<?r^/?>- America.  137 

gone  five  hundred  paces  out  of  our  Road,  to  look  upon  that 

fearful  Catarad ;  and  'twas  as  much  as  I  could  do,  to  get  at 

the  Canows  before  they  put  off.     To  be  taken  by  fuch  cruel 

Fellows,  [82]  was  to  me  no  trifling  thing. 

//  morir  e  niente^  ma  il  vivere  brugiando  (^     '  The  Prifoners  taken 

troppo.     To  die  is  nothing,  but  to  live  in  the       ^      ^    roqueje 
^^  ^  quently  burnt. 

midjl  of  Fire  *  is  too  much. 

As  for  the  Waterfall  of  Niagara  ;  'tis  feven  or  eight  hun- 
dred foot  high,  and  half  a  League  broad.  Towards  the 
middle  of  it  we  defcry  an  Ifland  that  leans  towards  the  Preci- 
pice, as  if  it  were  ready  to  fall.  All  the  Beafts  that  crofs  the 
Water  within  half  a  quarter  of  a  League  above  this  unfortu- 
nate Ifland,  are  fuck'd  in  by  force  of  the  Stream:  And  the 
Beafts  and  Fifh  that  are  thus  kill'd  by  the  prodigious  fall, 
ferve  for  food  to  fifty  Iroqueje^  who  are  fetled  about  two 
Leagues  off,  and  take  'em  out  of  the  water  with  their  Canows. 
Between  the  furface  of  the  water  that  fhelves  off  prodigioufly, 
and  the  foot  of  the  Precipice,  three  Men  may  crofs  in  a  breafl: 
without  any  other  dammage,  than  a  fprinkling  of  fome  few 
drops  of  water.^ 

To  return  to  the  Story  of  the  thoufand  I  roqueje;  I  muft 
tell  you,  that  we  crofs'd  the  Streight  with  all  the  vigour  we  were 


1  The  first  allusion  to  Niagara  Falls  is  found  in  the  account  of  Cartier's  voyage, 
in  1535.  Champlain  heard  many  relations  of  the  falls  from  the  Indians,  but  never 
saw  them  in  person.  Hennepin's  appears  to  he  the  first  detailed  description  by  an 
eye  witness  ;  but  he  characteristically  exaggerates  the  height  and  noise  of  the  cataract. 
See  Nenjj  Discovery,  pp.  54-56,  with  illustration. 

The  Seneca  village  mentioned  by  Lahontan  must  have  been  a  temporary  camp. 
The  Senecas  lived  east  of  Genesee  River  until  after  Denonville's  expedition,  and  had 
no  permanent  village  near  Niagara  until  a  number  of  years  later.  —  Ed. 


138  Some  New  Voyages 

mafters  of,  and  after  rowing  all  Night,  arriv'd  next  Morning 
at  the  mouth  of  the  Lake,  which  appear'd  to  be  indifferent 
rapid.  Then  we  were  fecure  from  all  danger,  for  the  Iroquefe 
Canows  are  fo  dull  and  large,  that  they  cannot  fail  near  fo 
quick  as  thofe  made  of  Birch-bark.  The  former  are  made  of 
Elm-bark,  which  is  very  heavy,  and  their  form  is  very  aukard; 
for  they  are  fo  long  and  broad  that  thirty  Men  row  in  them, 
two  abreaft,  whether  fitting  or  {landing,  and  the  fides  are  fo 
low,  that  they  dare  not  venture  'em  upon  the  Lakes,  tho'  the 
wind  be  very  flack.  We  coafted  along  the  North-Coaft  of 
the  Lake  of  Erie,  being  favour'd  by  the  Calms,  which  are  in  a 
manner  conftant  in  that  feafon,  efpecially  in  the  Southern 
Countries.  Upon  the  brink  of  this  Lake  we  frequently  faw 
[83]  flocks  of  fifty  or  fixty  Turkey's,  which  run  incredibly  faft 
upon  the  Sands:  And  the  Savages  of  our  Company  kill'd  great 
numbers  of  'em,  which  they  gave  to  us  in  exchange  for  the 
Fifh  that  we  catch'd.  The  i^th  we  arriv'd  at  a  long  point  of 
Land  which  fiioots  out  14  or  15  Leagues  into  the  Lake;  and 
the  heat  being  excefiive,  we  chofe  to  tranfport  our  Boats  and 
Baggage  two  hundred  paces  over-land,  rather  than  coafl:  about 
for  thirty  five  Leagues.^  Septemb.  6.  We  enter'd  the  Streight 
of  the  Lake  of  Huron,  where  we  met  with  a  flack  Current  of 
half  a  League  in  breadth,  that  continued  till  we  arriv'd  in  the 
Lake  of  St.  Claire,  which  is  twelve  Leagues  in  Circumference. 
The  2>th  of  the  fame  Month  we  fl;eer'd  on  to  the  other  end, 
from  whence  we  had  but  fix  Leagues  to  run  againft  the  flream, 


1  Long  Point,  Lake  Erie,  which  Hennepin  called  "  Cape  St.  Francis."  —Ed. 


to  iVor^Z'- America.  139 

till  we  arriv'd  in  the  Mouth  of  the  Lake  of  Hufoits,  where  we 
landed  on  the  14?^.  You  cannot  imagine  the  pleafant  prof- 
ped:  of  this  Streight,  and  of  the  little  Lake;  for  their  banks 
are  cover'd  with  all  forts  of  wild  Fruit-Trees.  'Tis  true,  the 
want  of  Agriculture  finks  the  agreeablenefs  of  the  Fruit ;  but 
their  plenty  is  very  furprifing.^  We  fpy'd  no  other  Animals 
upon  the  fhoar,  but  Herds  of  Harts,  and  Roe-bucks :  And 
when  we  came  to  little  Iflands,  we  fcour'd  'em,  in  order  to 
oblige  thefe  Beads  to  crofs  over  to  the  Continent,  upon  which 
they  offering  to  fwim  over,  were  knock'd  on  the  head  by  our 
Canow-men  that  were  planted  all  round  the  Iflands.  After 
our  arrival  at  the  Fort,  of  which  I  was  order'd  to  take  poffef- 
fion,  Mr.  Didhut  and  Mr.  de  Tonti  had  a  mind  to  reft  them- 
felves  for  fome  days,  as  well  as  the  Savages  that  accompany'd 
us.  This  Fort,  which  was  built  by  Mr.  Diilhut,  was  Garri- 
fon'd  upon  his  own  charges  by  the  Couretirs  de  Bois,  who  had 
taken  care  to  fow  in  it  fome  Bufhels  of  ?"//r^^^- Wheat,  which 
afforded  a  plentiful  Crop,  that  prov'd  of  great  ufe  to  me.^ 


^  Hennepin  says  that  he  named  Lake  St.  Clair,  and  gives  its  Iroquois  name  as 
"  Otsi  Keta."  All  early  travellers  remark  on  the  beauty  of  the  landscape  and  the 
abundance  of  wild  fruit  in  the  vicinity  of  Detroit.  See  fVis.  Hist.  Colls.,  xvi, 
pp.  129,  366.  —  Ed. 

2  It  was  part  of  Denonville's  plan  to  bar  the  English  from  the  upper  lakes  by 
erecting  a  fort  at  Detroit  River.  Accordingly  in  i6S6  he  sent  word  to  Duluth  to  pro- 
ceed thither  and  erect  a  stockade.  In  the  autumn  of  tiiat  year,  Duluth  collected  fifty 
coureurs  des  bois,  and  built  the  post,  which  he  named  Fort  St.  Joseph  —  not  on  the 
site  of  Detroit,  but  where  St.  Clair  River  flows  from  Lake  Huron,  apparently  near 
the  present  Fort  Gratiot,  Michigan.  See  A'^.  Y.  Colon.  Docs.,  ix,  pp.  300,  302.  A 
contemporary  description  says  :  "  Our  Fort  covers  a  square  of  one  Arpent  in  extent, 
without  the  Bastions,  and  is  very  advantageously  Situated  on  an  Eminence,  separated 
from  the  River  by  a  gentle  slope  of  about  forty  paces,  which  forms  a  very  pleasant 


I40  Some  New  Voyages 

The  Garrifon  furrendred  their  Poft  very  [84]  chearfully  to 
my  Detachment ;  and  then  purfued  their  Commerce  with  our 
Savages,  for  every  one  had  leave  to  go  where  he  pleas'd. 
This  gave  me  an  opportunity  of  fending  two  Canows  under  a 
guard  of  Soldiers,  to  difpofe  of  a  great  Roll  of  Tobacco  of 
200  weight,  that  Mr.  Dulhut  had  kindly  prefented  me  with; 
for  that  honeft  Gentleman  inform'd  me,  that  my  Soldiers 
might  eafily  purchafe  Corn  in  exchange  for  Tobacco,  fooner 
than  for  any  other  Commodities.  I  am  oblig'd  to  him  as  long 
as  I  live;  but  I  am  much  affraid,  the  Treafurer  of  the  Navy 
will  make  him  no  better  compenfation  for  this  piece  of  Service, 
than  for  a  thoufand  other  disburfements  upon  the  King's 
account.  The  Soldiers  I  fent  with  the  Tobacco,  return'd  in 
the  latter  end  of  November,  and  brought  with  'em  the  Reverend 
Father  Avenau  the  Jefuit,  who  found  no  occafion  to  trouble 
himfelf  with  preaching  up  Abftinence  from  Meat  in  the  time 
of  Lent}  They  brought  advice,  that  a  Party  of  the  Hurons 
being  prepar'd  to  march  out  of  their  Villages,  to  attack  the 
Iroqtiefe  Beaver-hunters,  would  fpeedily  repair  to  the  Fort  to 
reft  themfelves.     In  the  mean  time  I  waited  with  impatience 

Glacis  [parapet] .  Care  has  been  taken  to  place  it  at  the  narrowest  part  of  the  River, 
which  is  here  a  gunshot  in  width."  iris.  Hist.  Colls.,  xvi,  p.  128.  The  further  his- 
tory of  Fort  St.  Joseph,  which  Lahontan  was  to  command,  is  related  by  him. 

"Turkey  wheat "  is  maize  or  Indian  corn,  so  called  from  a  vague  notion  that  it 
was  first  found  in  Turkey.  —  Ed. 

1  Father  Claude  Aveneau  came  to  Canada  in  1685,  and  was  assigned  next  year 
to  the  Ottawa  mission  at  Mackinac.  One  would  judge  from  Lahontan's  remark  that 
this  missionary  acted  as  chaplain  of  Fort  St.  Joseph  throughout  the  winter  of  1687-88. 
He  passed  the  remainder  of  his  life  in  the  West,  for  many  years  serving  in  the  Miami 
mission,  and  finally  dying  at  Quebec  in  1711.  — Ed. 


to  iVor^^- America.  141 

for  the  arrival  of  one  Turcot,^  and  four  more  of  the  Coureurs 
de  Bois,  who  were  to  come  to  me  in  the  beginning  of  December, 
along  with  fome  other  Huntfmen  that  Mr.  de  Deuonville  had 
promis'd  to  fend  me:  But  hearing  nothing  of  'em,  and  our 
Commons  being  at  that  time  very  (hort,  I  fhould  have  been 
very  much  pinch'd,  if  four  young  Canadefe  who  were  expert 
Huntfmen,  had  not  tarry'd  with  me  all  Winter.  The  above- 
mention'd  Party  of  the  Hurons  arriv'd  Decemb.  2.  being  headed 
by  one  Saentfoiian^  who  left  me  his  Canow  and  his  Baggage,  to 
keep  till  he  return'd  ;  for  he  could  not  pofTibly  continue  his 
Navigation  longer,  upon  the  account  that  the  furface  of  the 
water  began  then  to  be  cover'd  with  Ice.  Thefe  Savages  chofe 
to  march  [85]  over-land  to  the  Fort  of  Niagara^  where  they 
expedled  to  receive  intelligence  before  they  enter'd  the 
Country  of  the  Iroquefe.  They  march'd  ten  days,  i.  e.  fifty 
Leagues,  without  feeing  one  Soul.  But  at  laft  their  Scouts 
perceiv'd  the  foot-fteps  of  fome  Huntfmen,  which  they  trac'd 
at  a  great  pace  for  a  whole  Night,  the  Snow  being  then  a  foot 
deep.  Towards  the  break  of  day  they  return'd,  and  gave 
notice  to  their  Fellow-Adventurers,  that  they  had  difcover'd 
fix  Hutts,  with  ten  Men  lodg'd  in  each  of  'em.  Upon  this 
Intelligence  the  whole  party  made  a  halt,  in  order  to  paint 
their  faces,  to  prepare  their  Arms,  and  to  concert  proper 
Meafures.     The  attack  was  fo  form'd,  that  two  Men  made 


^  A  habitant  by  this  name  was  captured  by  the  Iroquois  in  1652.  As  coureur 
des  hois,  he  was  accused  of  taking  refuge  among  the  English  to  escape  his  crimes  — 
N.  Y.  Colon.  Docs.,  ix,  p.  133.  He  appears  to  have  been  pardoned  and  again 
received  in  favor  by  the  French  authorities.  — Ed. 


142  Some  New  Voyages 

foftly  up  to  the  two  doors  of  the  Hutts  with  their  Clubs  in 
their  Hands,  to  knock  down  any  one  that  offer'd  to  come  out, 
while  the  reft  were  imploy'd  in  firing  their  pieces.  And  the 
Aftion  was  crown'd  with  wonderful  Succefs ;  for  the  Iroqueje 
being  furpriz'd  and  fhut  up  in  their  bark  Prifons,  there  was 
but  two  out  of  fixty  four  that  made  their  efcape ;  and  thefe 
two  being  naked  and  deftitute  of  Fire-Arms,  could  not  but 
perifh  in  the  Woods.  Three  of  the  Hiirons  indeed  were  kill'd 
upon  the  fpot,  but  to  attone  for  that  lofs,  the  Agreffors  carry'd 
ofif  fourteen  Prifoners,  and  four  Women.  This  done,  they 
march'd  back  to  my  Fort  with  all  poflible  Expedition.  Among 
the  Captive  Slaves,  there  were  three  who  had  made  part  of 
the  number  of  the  looo  Iroqueje  that  thought  to  have  furpris'd 
us  the  year  before,  when  we  were  imploy'd  in  the  great  Land- 
Carriage  at  Niagara.  They  gave  us  to  underftand,  that  the 
Fort  of  Niagara  was  block'd  up  by  eight  hundred  Iroqueje, 
who  mean'd  to  appear  before  my  Poft  without  any  delay. 
This  troublefom  piece  of  news  gall'd  me  to  the  laft  degree, 
for  fear  of  being  reduc'd  to  extremities ;  and  with  that  view  I 
was  a  very  nice  Husband  of  what  Corn  I  had  [86]  left.  I  was 
not  apprehenfive  of  being  attack'd  by  'em,  for  the  Savages 
never  fight  fairly,  neither  do  they  ever  attempt  to  pull  up 
Paliffadoes ;  but  I  was  affraid  that  they  would  ftarve  us  out  by 
cramping  our  Huntfmen  in  their  due  range.  However,  the 
Hurons  continuing  fifteen  days  in  my  Fort  to  refrefh  them- 
felves,  I  us'd  the  precaution  of  ingaging  them  to  afiift  my 
Huntfmen  in  providing  Meat :  But  as  foon  as  they  took  leave 


to  iVor^A- America.  143 

of  me  in  order  to  return  home,  our  hunting  was  at  an  end 
and  the  Gates  v/ere  kept  fhut. 

At  laft,  finding  that  my  Provifions  were  almoft  out,  I 
refolv'd  to  go  to  MiJJilimakinac^  to  buy  up  Corn  from  the 
Hiirons  and  the  Outaouans}  Accordingly,  having  left  fome 
Soldiers  to  guard  the  Fort  in  my  abfence,  I  imbarqu'd  with 
the  reft  of  my  Detachment  on  the  firft  of  Aprils  with  a  gentle 
South-Eaft  Gale ;  by  the  help  of  which  we  infenfibly  crofs'd 
the  Bay  of  Sagninan.  That  little  Gulf  is  fix  hours  over,  and 
in  the  middle  of  it  there  are  two  little  Iflands,  which  afford  a 
very  feafonable  fhelter  when  a  wind  arifes  in  the  crofiing 
over.  Before  you  have  crofs'd  this  Bay,  the  Coaft  is  all  a 
long  full  of  Rocks  and  Shelves,  one  of  which  that  I  faw  was 
fix  Leagues  broad :  But  above  it  the  Coaft  is  clean  and  low, 
efpecially  towards  the  Sand-River,  which  lies  half  way  between 
that  Bay  and  a  place  call'd  VAnfe  du  Tonnere.^  Now  this  laft 
place  is  reckon'd  thirty  Leagues  off  the  Bay.  Having  paft 
that,  we  had  but  thirty  Leagues  more  to  fail ;  which  we  did 
without  any  danger,  by  the  help  of  an  Eaft-South-Eaft  Gale, 
that  fwell'd  the  Waves  prodigioufly.  In  the  Mouth  of  the 
lUinefe  Lake  we  met  the  party  of  the  Hurons  that  I  mention'd 
before ;  and  four  or  five  hundred  Outaouas^  who  were  bound 
home,  after  having  fpent  the  Winter  in  hunting  of  Beavers 
upon  the  River  of  Sagninan.    Both  they  and  we  were  forc'd  to 


1  In  the  French  edition,  Lahontan  explains  that  to  abandon  one's  post  would  be 
censured  in  the  Old  World  ;  in  the  New,  it  is  regarded  as  a  species  of  heroism.  —  Ed. 

2  The  description  of  Saginaw  Bay,  River  Au  Sable  (Sand  River),  and  Thunder 
Bay  is  easily  recognized.  —  Ed. 


144  Some  New  Voyages 

lye  by  in  that  place  for  three  or  [87]  four  days,  by  reafon  of 
the  Ice  :  After  which  the  Lake  was  clear'd,  and  we  crofs'd  it 
together.  When  the  Hiirons  came  afhoar,  they  confulted 
among  themfelves  how  to  difpofe  of  their  Slaves :  After 
which  they  made  a  Prefent  of  one  of  'em  to  Mr.  de  Juchereau^ 
who  commanded  in  that  place  ^;  but  the  poor  wretch  was  pre- 
fently  fhot  to  Death.  Another  of  'em  was  prefented  to  the 
Otitaouas,  who  granted  him  his  Life,  for  fuch  reafons  as  you 
would  eafily  apprehend,  if  you  were  better  acquainted  with 
the  poHcy  and  cunning  of  that  fort  of  Men,  whom  you  now 
take  for  Beafts. 

I  arriv'd  in  this  place  on  the  iSth  of  Jpril,  and  my  uneafi- 
nefs  and  trouble  took  date  from  the  day  of  my  arrival :  For 
I  found  the  Indian  Corn  fo  fcarce  by  reafon  of  the  preceding 
bad  Harvefts,  that  I  defpair'd  of  finding  half  fo  much  as  I 
wanted.  But  after  all,  I  am  hopeful,  that  two  Villages  will 
furnifh  me  with  almoft  as  much  as  I  have  occafion  for.  Mr. 
Cavelier  arriv'd  here  May  6,  being  accompany'd  with  his 
Nephew,  Father  Anaftafe  the  Recollet,  a  Pilot,  one  of  the 
Savages,  and  fome  few  Frenchmen^  which  made  a  fort  of  a 
party-colour'd  Retinue.  Thefe  Frenchmen  were  fome  of  thofe 
that   Mr.  de  la  Salle  had   conduced   upon  the   difcovery  of 


^  This  was  probably  Charles  Juchereau  de  St.  Denis,  eldest  son  of  Nicolas,  sieur 
de  Beauport,  who  the  previous  year  had  been  employed  as  a  messenger  to  Mackinac 
by  Denonville.  During  the  absence  of  La  Durantaye  (1687-88)  he  commanded  the 
post.  In  later  years  he  became  councillor  of  the  king,  and  lieutenant  general  of 
Montreal  ;  he  assisted  Iberville  in  founding  Louisiana,  and  in  1702  built  a  post  near 
the  mouth  of  the  Ohio.  A  younger  brother,  Louis,  undertook  a  remarkable  explora- 
tion into  New  Mexico,  and  lived  for  many  years  at  Natchitoches.  —  Ed. 


to  North' h.vi\tnc2i.  145 

Mijfifipi.  They  give  out,  that  they  are  fent  to  Canada^  in 
order  to  go  to  France^  with  fome  Difpatches  from  Mr.  de  la 
Salle  to  the  King :  But  we  fufpedl  that  he  is  dead,  becaufe 
he  do's  not  return  along  with  'em.  I  fhall  not  fpend  time  in 
taking  notice  of  their  great  Journey  over-land ;  which  by  the 
account  they  give  cannot  be  lefs  than  eight  hundred  Leagues.^ 
Mijfilimakinac,  the  place  I  am  now  in,  is  certainly  a  place 
of  great  Importance.  It  lies  in  the  Latitude  of  forty  five 
Degrees,  and  thirty  Minutes ;  but  as  for  its  Longitude,  I 
have  nothing  to  fay  of  it,  for  reafons  mention'd  in  my  fecond 
Letter.  'Tis  not  above  half  a  League  diftant  from  the  Illinefe 
Lake,  [88]  an  account  of  which,  and  indeed  of  all  the  other 
Lakes,  you  may  expe6t  elfe-where.  Here  the  Hurons  and 
Outaouas  have,  each  of  'em,  a  Village  ;  the  one  being  fever'd 
from  the  other  by  a  fingle  Paliffadoe :   But  the  Outaouas  are 


^  These  were  the  survivors  of  La  Salle's  last  and  fatal  expedition,  which  was  to 
have  founded  a  colony  at  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi.  See  Parkman,  La  Salle, 
pp.  356-446  ;  Suite,  "  Le  Mort  de  La  Salle,"  in  Can.  Roy.  Soc.  Proc,  2d  series,  iv, 
pp.  3-32. 

Abbe  Jean  Cavelier,  the  elder  brother  of  the  explorer,  was  born  in  Rouen,  and 
became  a  Sulpitian  priest.  He  had  preceded  La  Salle  to  Canada,  and  often  vexed  him 
by  his  censoriousness.  Joining  this  last  expedition,  he  led  the  few  survivors  of  the 
party,  after  the  murder  of  La  Salle,  back  from  Texas  to  Canada  ;  and  concealed  the 
death  of  the  explorer  from  all  his  friends  en  route,  partly  to  secure  his  brother's  prop- 
erty.    He  died  in  17 17  at  the  house  of  his  sister  in  Rouen. 

Jean  Cavelier,  the  younger,  was  a  nephew  of  La  Salle,  a  lad  of  fourteen  when  he 
embarked  with  his  uncle  at  La  Rochelle  (1684).  Returning  to  France,  he  entered 
the  army. 

Father  Anastase  Douay  was,  according  to  Hennepin,  a  native  of  Hainault.  This 
was  his  first  journey  to  America,  and  his  published  Memoir  is  largely  used  as  a  source 
for  the  expedition.  After  his  return  to  Europe  he  was  vicar  of  the  Recollects  at  Cam- 
bray,  and  in  1699  embarked  the  second  time  for  Louisiana,  with  Iberville,  to  found  a 
mission  among  the  Cenis.  —  Ed. 
10 


146  Some  New  Voyages 

beginning  to  build  a  Fort  upon  a  Hill,  that  ftands  but  1000 
or  1200  paces  off.  This  Precaution  they  were  prompted  to 
by  the  murder  of  a  certain  Hurotty  call'd  Sandaoiiires^  who 
was  affaffinated  in  the  Saguinan  River  by  four  young  Outaouas. 
In  this  place  the  Jefuits  have  a  little  Houfe,  or  Colledge 
adjoyning  to  a  fort  of  a  Church,  and  inclos'd  with  Pales  that 
feparate  it  from  the  Village  of  the  Hiirons.  Thefe  good 
Fathers  lavifh  away  all  their  Divinity  and  Patience  to  no  pur- 
pofe,  in  converting  fuch  ignorant  Infidels :  For  all  the  length 
they  can  bring  'em  to,  is,  that  oftentimes  they'll  defire  Baptifm 
for  their  dying  Children,  and  fome  few  fuperannuated  Perfons 
confent  to  receive  the  Sacrament  of  Baptifm,  when  they  find 
themfelves  at  the  point  of  Death.^  The  Coureurs  de  Bots  have 
but  a  very  fmall  fettlement  here ;  though  at  the  fame  time  'tis 
not  inconfiderable,  as  being  the  Staple  of  all  the  Goods  that 
they  truck  with  the  South  and  the  Weft  Savages ;  for  they 
cannot  avoid  pafling  this  way,  when  they  go  to  the  Seats  of 
the  lUineJe^  and  the  Oumamis,  or  to  the  Bay  des  Puants,^  and 
to  the  River  of  Mijfifipi.     The  Skins  which  they  import  from 


1  During  the  French  regime  Michiilimackinac  (now  Mackinac)  was  the  capital 
of  the  Northwest.  It  had  been  occupied  by  traders  for  many  years ;  but  the  first  Jesuit 
mission  was  not  begun  until  Marquette  established  that  of  St.  Ignace  in  1671.  A  few 
years  later  the  fort  was  built  and  garrisoned.  Mackinac  Island  is  45°  54'  north  lati- 
tude by  80°  30'  west  longitude  ;  but  the  Mackinac  of  Lahontan's  time  lay  on  the  north 
shore  of  the  strait,  as  his  map  plainly  indicates.  For  further  details  of  the  history  of 
this  place,  see  Thwaites,  "  Story  of  Mackinac,"  in  Honv  George  Rogers  Clark  If  on 
the  North-west  (Chicago,  1903).  —  Ed. 

2  Bay  des  Puants  (Stinkards)  was  the  French  name  for  Green  Bay,  Wisconsin. 
The  origin  of  the  term  arose  from  the  significance  of  the  name  of  the  Winnebago 
(men  from  the  bad-smelling  water).  For  further  details,  see  Wis.  Hist.  Colls.,  xvi, 
p.  3  ;  Thwaites,  Stories  of  the  Badger  State  (New  York,  1900),  p.  30.  —  Ed. 


to  iV^or^Z>- America.  147 

thefe  different  places,  muft  lye  here  fome  time  before  they 
are  tranf ported  to  the  Colony.  MijjiUmakinac  is  fituated  very 
advantageoufly  ;  for  the  Iroquefe  dare  not  venture  with  their 
forry  Canows,  to  crofs  the  Streight  of  the  lUinefe  Lake,  which 
is  two  Leagues  over  ;  befides  that  the  Lake  of  the  Hiirons  is 
too  rough  for  fuch  flender  Boats :  And  as  they  cannot  come 
to  it  by  Water,  fo  they  cannot  approach  to  it  by  Land,  by 
reafon  of  the  Marfhes,  Fens,  and  little  Rivers,  which  'twould 
be  very  difficult  to  crofs ;  not  to  mention  that  the  Streight  of 
the  lUineJe  Lake  lies  ftill  in  their  way. 

[89]  You  can  fcarce  believe.  Sir,  what  vafl:  fholes  of  white 
Fifh  are  catch'd  about  the  middle  of  the  Channel,  between  the 
Continent  and  the  Ifle  of  Mijfilimakinac.  The  Outaouas  and 
the  Htirons  could  never  fubfift  here,  without  that  Fiihery ;  for 
they  are  oblig'd  to  travel  above  twenty  Leagues  in  the  Woods, 
before  they  can  kill  any  Harts  or  Elks,  and  'twould  be  an 
infinite  fatigue  to  carry  their  Carcafes  fo  far  over  Land.  This 
fort  of  white  Fifli  in  my  opinion,  is  the  only  one  in  all  thefe 
Lakes  that  can  be  call'd  good ;  and  indeed  it  goes  beyond  all 
other  forts  of  River  Fifh.  Above  all,  it  has  one  fingular  prop- 
erty, namely,  that  all  forts  of  Sauces  fpoil  it,  fo  that  'tis  always 
eat  either  boil'd  or  broil'd,  without  any  manner  of  feafoning.^ 
In  the  Channel  I  now  fpeak  of  the  Currents  are  fo  ftrong,  that 
they  fometimes  fuck  in  the  Nets,  though  they  are  two  or  three 
Leagues  off.    In  fome  feafons,  it  fo  falls  out  that  the  Currents 


^  There  are  several  species  of  the  whitefish  of  the  lakes.  The  common  one, 
Coregonus  clupclformis,  is  the  largest  and  the  best  food.  These  fish  formed  an 
important  article  of  Indian  diet.  —  Ed. 


148  Some  New  Voyages 

run  three  days  Eaftward,  two  days  to  the  Weft,  one  to  the 
South,  and  four  Northward  ;  fometimes  more,  and  fometimes 
lefs.  The  caufe  of  this  diverfity  of  Currents  could  never  be 
fathom'd,  for  in  a  calm,  they'l  run  in  the  fpace  of  one  day  to 
all  the  points  of  the  Compafs,  i.  e.  fometimes  one  way,  fome- 
times another,  without  any  limitation  of  time;  fo  that  the  deci- 
fion  of  this  matter  muft  be  left  to  the  Difciples  of  Copernicus. 
Here  the  Savages  catch  Trouts  as  bigh  as  one's  Thigh,  with 
a  fort  of  Fifhing-Hook  made  in  the  form  of  an  Awl,  and  made 
faft  to  a  piece  of  Brafs  wire,  which  is  joyn'd  to  the  Line  that 
reaches  to  the  bottom  of  the  Lake.^  This  fort  of  Fifhery  is 
carried  on  not  only  with  Hooks,  but  with  Nets,  and  that  in 
Winter,  as  well  as  in  Summer  :  For  they  make  holes  in  the  Ice 
at  a  certain  diftance  one  from  another,  thro'  which  they  con- 
du6t  the  Nets  with  Poles.  The  Outaouas  and  the  Hurons  have 
very  pleafant  Fields,  in  which  they  fow  Indian  Corn,  Peafe, 
[90]  and  Beans,  befides  a  fort  of  Citruls,^  and  Melons,  which 
differs  much  from  ours,  and  of  which  I  fhall  take  occafion  to 
fpeak  in  another  place.  Sometimes,  thefe  Savages  fell  their 
Corn  very  dear,  efpecially  when  the  Beaver-hunting  happens 
not  to  take  well :  Upon  which  occafion  they  make  fufficient 
reprifals  upon  us  for  the  extravagant  price  of  our  Com- 
modities. 

As  foon  as  I  have  bought  up  fixty  facks  of  Corn,  each  of 


^  This  is  the  Mackinac  trout  {Sal'velinus  namycush) ,  which  often  grows  to  great 
size.     Its  flesh  is  inferior  to  that  of  the  whitefish.  —  Ed. 

2  Citrouille,  or  summer  squash  {Cucurbita  polymortha)  was  raised  extensively 
by  the  North  American  Indians.  —  Ed. 


to  North' hmtnc2i.  149 

which  may  weigh  fifty  pound,  I  am  to  march  with  my  Detach- 
ment alone  to  St.  Mary\  Fort,  in  order  to  ingage  the  Sauteurs 
or  the  Inhabitants  of  Saut  Saint  Marie^  to  joyn  the  Outaouas'^; 
after  which  we  mean  to  march  with  joynt  Forces  to  the  Coun- 
try of  the  Iroquefe.  Befides  thefe,  there's  a  party  of  a  hundred 
Hiirons  ready  to  march,  under  the  Command  of  the  great 
Leader  Adario^  whom  the  French  call  the  Rat;  but  they  do 
not  march  our  way.  I  fhall  write  to  you  with  the  firfl  Oppor- 
tunity after  my  return  from  this  Expedition.^  Perhaps  the 
Jefuits  will  fend  your  Letters  for  me  along  with  Mr.  Denon- 
ville^s  to  Fort  St.  Jofeph,  where  I  am  to  refide.  I  fhall  expe6l 
their  arrival  with  the  utmoft  impatience.  In  the  mean  time  I 
fend  you  a  Letter  direded  to  Mr.  de  Seignelai,  the  purport  of 
which  I  have  here  fubjoyn'd.  'Twill  be  a  very  fenfible  obliga- 
tion laid  upon  me,  if  you  vouchfafe  to  believe  that  I  always  am, 

SIR, 

YourSy  &c. 


^  The  Saulteurs  were  a  Chippewa  tribe,  so  named  by  the  French  from  first  encoun- 
tering one  of  their  bands  at  Sault  Ste.  Marie ;  the  name  was  afterwards  extended  to 
the  entire  tribe.  Sault  Ste.  Marie  was  visited  by  traders  as  early  as  1616,  and  the 
Jesuit  mission  thereat  was  established  in  1669.  In  early  days  it  took  precedence  of 
Mackinac;  but  after  tlie  discovery  of  the  Mississippi,  the  latter  place  increased  in 
importance,  as  being  upon  the  path  thither,  and  by  1689  the  Sault  was  practically 
abandoned,  except  as  a  station  on  the  trade  route  to  the  far  Northwest. —  Ed. 

2  This  is  Lahontan's  first  mention  of  the  famous  chief,  to  whom  he  ascribes  his 
Dialogues.  Kondiaronk,  to  give  him  his  Huron  name,  was  a  savage  of  much  ability, 
who  played  a  prominent  part  in  Frontenac's  War  (1689-97) .  His  skill  in  diplomacy, 
and  in  confederating  the  tribes,  makes  of  him  a  precursor  of  Pontiac  and  Tecumseh. 
He  was  strongly  attached  to  Frontenac,  and  accepted  his  counsel.  Charlevoix  says 
that  he  was  a  Christian  convert,  and  often  preached  at  Mackinac.  Dying  at  Montreal 
during  an  important  peace  conference  (1701),  he  was  interred  with  elaborate  rites. 
See  Charlevoix,  Histoire  de  Nowvelle  France  (Shea's  trans.),  v,  pp.  145-148.  —  Ed. 


150  Some  New  Voyages 


[91]      The  Letter  directed  to  Mr.  de  Seignelay. 

Honoured  Sir, 

I  AM  the  Son  of  a  Gentleman  that  fpent  three  hundred 
thoufand  Crov/ns  in  deepening  the  Water  of  the  two  Gaves 
of  Beam :  He  had  the  good  luck  to  compafs  his  End  by  con- 
veying a  great  many  Brooks  to  thefe  two  Rivers;  and  the 
Current  of  the  Adour  was  by  that  means  fo  far  ftrengthen'd 
as  to  render  the  Bar  of  Bayonne  paffable  by  a  fifty  Gun  Ship, 
whereas  in  former  times  a  Frigot  of  ten  Guns  durft  not  ven- 
ture over  it.  'Twas  in  confideration  of  this  great  and  fucceffful 
Attempt,  that  his  Majefty  granted  to  my  Father  and  his  Heirs 
for  ever,  certain  Duties  and  Taxes,  amounting  to  the  Sum  of 
three  thoufand  Livres  a  Year.  This  Grant  was  confirm'd  by 
an  Ad  of  the  Council  of  State,  dated  January  9.  1658,  Sign'd 
Boffuet,  Collated,  &'c.  Another  Advantage  accruing  to  the 
King  and  the  Province  from  my  Father's  Services,  confifts  in 
the  bringing  down  of  Mafts  and  Yards  from  the  Pyrenean 
Mountains,  which  could  never  have  been  eifeded,  if  he  had 
not  by  his  Care,  and  by  the  disburfmg  of  immenfe  Sums,  en- 
larged the  quantity  of  Water  in  the  Gave  of  Oleron  to  a  double 
proportion.  Thefe  Duties  and  Taxes  which  had  been  juftly 
intail'd  upon  him  and  his  Heirs,  ceas'd  to  be  ours  when  he 
dy'd ;  and  to  inflame  the  Difgrace,  I  loft  his  Places,  viz.  that 
of  being  a  Honorary  Judge  of  the  Parliament  of  Pau^  and  Chief 


to  iV<?;Y^-America.  151 

Juftice  in  Eyre  for  the  Province  of  Beam  ;  all  which  were  mine 
by  Inheritance.^  Thefe  Loffes  are  now  follow'd  by  an  unjuft 
Seizure  that  fome  pretended  Creditors  have  made  of  the  Barony 
of  la  Hontan,  [92]  of  a  piece  of  Ground  that  lies  contiguous  to 
it,  and  of  a  hundred  thoufand  Livres  that  lay  in  the  hands  of 
the  Chamber  of  Bayonne.  Thefe  faithlefs  Creditors  have  no 
other  reafon  to  fue  me,  but  that  I  am  now  in  the  fagg  end  of 
the  World,  and  that  they  are  rich,  and  fupported  by  the  Credit 
and  Protedlion  of  the  Parliament  of  Paris,  where  they  hope  to 
make  good  their  unjuft  Pretenfions  in  my  Abfence.  Laft  Year 
I  obtain'd  Leave  to  return  to  France,  in  order  to  take  care  of 
this  matter;  but  now  Mr.  de  Denonville  has  fent  me  with  a 
Detachment  to  thefe  Lakes;  from  whence  I  humbly  petition 
that  your  Honour  would  vouchfafe  me  Leave  to  come  home 
the  next  Year,  and  at  the  fame  time  honour  me  with  your 
Protection.     I  am,  with  all  pofTible  refped. 

Tour  Honours,  &c. 


1  For  a  further  account  of  the  services  of  Lahontan's  father,  Isaac  Lorn  d'Arce, 
baron  de  Lahontan  and  d'EsIeich,  see  Roy,  "  Le  Baron  de  Lahontan,"  in  Ca;/.  Roy. 
Soc.  Proc,  I  St  series,  xii,  pp.  67-69,  166-173.  —  Ed. 


152  Some  New  P^oyages 


LETTER    XV. 

Dated  at  Mijfilimakinac  Sept.  18.  1688. 
Dejcribing  the  Fall  call'd  Saut  St.  Marie,  where  the  Author  per- 
fwades  the  Inhabitants  to  joyn  the  Outaouas,  and  march  againft 
the  Iroquefe.    And  containing  an  Account  of  the  Occurrences  of 
the  Voyage  between  that  Place  and  Miffilimakinac. 

SIR, 

I  AM  now  return'd  from  the  Iroquefe  Country,  and  have 
quitted  the  Fort  of  5^.  Jofeph,  againft  my  Will.  I  cannot 
allow  my  felf  to  doubt,  but  that  you  took  care  of  the  Letter 
direded  for  Mr.  de  Seignelay,  v^\i\ch.  I  tranfmitted  to  you  three 
Months  ago. 

[93]  I  fet  out  from  hence  in  my  Canow,  June  2.  And  after 
my  Arrival  at  the  Water-fall  call'd  Saut  Sainte  Marie,  I  per- 
fwaded  forty  young  Warlike  Fellows  to  joyn  the  Party  of  the 
Outaouas  that  I  mention'd  in  my  laft.  This  Saut  Sainte  Marie 
is  a  Catarad,  or  rather  a  Water-fall  of  two  Leagues  in  length, 
which  gives  vent  to  the  Waters  of  the  upper  Lake,  and  at  the 
bottom  of  which,  not  far  from  the  Jefuits  Houfe,  there's  a 
Village  of  the  Outchipoues,  alias  Sauteurs}  This  Place  is  a  great 
Thoroughfare   for  the   Coureurs  de  Bois  that  trade  with  the 

1  For  an  interesting  Indian  legend  of  the  origin  of  Sault  Ste.  Marie,  see  Jes.  Ret., 
liv,  p.  201.  —  Ed. 


to  North- A.mtnc2i,  153 

Northern  People,  who  ufually  repair  to  the  brinks  of  that 
Lake  in  the  Summer.  The  continual  Fogg  that  rifes  from 
the  upper  Lake,  and  fpreads  over  the  adjacent  Country,  ren- 
ders the  Ground  fo  barren,  that  it  bears  no  Corn.  The  13th 
of  the  fame  Month  I  fet  out  from  the  abovemention'd  Village, 
being  accompany'd  by  the  forty  young  Sauteurs,  who  embark'd 
in  five  Canows,  each  of  which  held  eight  Men.  The  i6th  we 
arriv'd  at  the  Ifle  of  Detour,  where  my  Soldiers  and  the  Party 
of  the  Outaoiias  had  tarry'd  for  me  two  days.^  The  firft  day 
was  fpent  by  the  Outaouas  and  the  Sauteurs  in  Warlike  Feafts, 
Dancing,  and  Singing,  purfuant  to  their  wonted  Cuftom : 
The  next  day  we  all  embark'd,  and  traverfing  from  Ifle  to  Ifle, 
made  the  Ifland  of  Manitoualin  in  four  days.  This  Ifland  is 
25  Leagues  long,  and  feven  or  eight  broad.  In  former  times 
'twas  pofTefs'd  by  the  Outaouas  of  Talon,  call'd  the  Otontagans ; 
who  were  diflodg'd  by  the  Progrefs  of  the  Iroquefe,  that  has 
ruin'd  fo  many  Nations.^  We  coafted  upon  that  Ifle  a  whole 
day ;  and  being  favour'd  by  a  Calm,  crofs'd  from  Ifle  to  Ifle 


1  Isle  of  Detour  was  the  present  Drummond  Island,  which  lies  east  of  Detour 
Strait — the  passage  to  St.  Mary's  River;  the  Indian  name  was  "  Pontaganipy."  In 
1815  the  island  obtained  its  present  title  in  honor  of  Sir  Gordon  Drummond,  then 
lieutenant-governor  of  Canada.  See  Cook,  Drummond  Island  (Lansing,  Mich., 
1896).  — Ed. 

2  Grand  Manitouiin  Island  appears  to  have  been  the  original  home  of  the  Ottawa 
—  first  called  by  the  French  "  cheveux  relevez,"  from  their  custom  of  wearing  the 
hair  erect.  See  Jes.  Rel.,  xiv,  note  9.  After  the  devastation  of  the  Huron  country 
by  the  Iroquois  (1649-51),  many  of  the  vanquished  Huron  fled  to  Manitouiin  ;  later, 
the  entire  island  appears  to  have  been  deserted.  The  Relation  of  1670-72  speaks  of 
a  tribe  of  Ottawa  who  had  betaken  themselves  to  this  island,  their  former  home  ;  prob- 
ably this  was  the  band  led  by  chief  Talon  (named  for  the  intendant  of  Canada), 
whom  Hennepin  encountered  in  this  country.  See  his  Neiv  Discovery,  pp.  316,  317. 
The  present  Indian  population  is  an  admixture  of  Huron  and  Ottawa. — Ed. 


154  Some  New  Voyages 

till  we  made  the  Eaft-fide  of  the  Lake.  In  this  Paffage  we 
crofs'd  between  two  Iflands  that  were  fix  Leagues  diftant  the 
one  from  the  other ;  and  upon  that  occafion  our  Watermen, 
who  were  not  us'd  to  venture  fo  far  out  in  their  flender  Boats, 
were  fain  to  tugg  hard  at  their  Oars.^  The  Savages  flood  out 
at  firft,  and  refus'd  to  [94]  venture  fo  far  from  Land,  for  they 
would  rather  have  gone  fifty  Leagues  about ;  but  at  laft  I 
over-perfwaded  'em,  by  reprefenting  that  I  would  have  been 
very  loth  to  venture  my  own  Perfon,  if  I  had  not  been  fuf- 
ficently  provided  againfi:  all  danger  by  an  exad  knowledge 
of  the  Winds  and  the  Storms.  The  Calm  continuing,  we 
made  the  River  of  Theonontate  on  the  25th.  The  next  day 
there  fprung  up  a  Gale  from  the  Weft-fouth-weft,  which  kept 
us  back  for  four  or  five  days ;  but  our  flop  was  of  no  great 
advantage  to  us,  for  it  rain'd  fo  heavily,  that  we  could  not 
hunt.  This  Country  is  the  ancient  Seat  of  the  Hurons,  as  it 
appears  from  the  Name  they  give  to  their  Nations  in  their 
own  Language,  viz.  Theonontateronons,  i.  e.  the  Inhabitants  of 
Theonontate.  But  after  the  I roquefe  had,  upon  divers  occafions, 
taken  and  defeated  great  numbers  of  'em,  the  refi:  quitted  the 
Country  to   avoid   the  like   Fate.^     We   re-embark'd  on  the 


^  Scadding  {Canadian  Journal,  new  series,  xiii,  p.  313)  identifies  the  two  islands 
as  those  now  known  as  Fitzwilliam,  and  the  Isle  of  Caves  off  Cape  Hurd,  both  across 
the  entrance  of  Georgian  Bay.  He  identifies  the  River  Theonontate  with  the  Mait- 
land,  in  Huron  County,  Ontario.  It  was  more  probably  the  Nottawausaga,  in  Simcoe 
County,  where  the  Tionnontate  had  their  earliest  home.  —  Ed. 

2  The  Tionnontate,  called  by  the  French  Tobacco  Huron  or  Petuns,  were  known 
to  the  earliest  French  explorers.  Their  ancient  seat  was  in  Simcoe  County,  but  all 
the  peninsula  between  Georgian  Bay  and  lower  Lake  Huron  was  known  as  the 
"  Country  of  the  Ancient  Hurons."     This  is  the  tribe  among  whom  Marquette  had 


to  iVor^A- America.  155 

29th,  and  on  the  ift  of  July  arriv'd  at  Fort  St.  Jofeph^  where 
the  Soldiers  I  had  left  waited  for  us  with  great  Impatience. 
Having  landed  fome  Sacks  Corn  at  the  Fort,  we  fet  out  again 
on  the  3d  of  Jnly\  and  purfued  our  Courfe  with  all  diligence, 
in  order  to  an  early  Appearance  in  the  Iroquefe  Country.  We 
fail'd  through  the  Streight  or  Neck,  and  flood  to  the  South- 
fide,  of  the  Lake  Erie ;  and  being  favour'd  by  the  Weather, 
arriv'd  on  the  17th  in  the  River  of  Conde,  which  I  fhall  have 
occafion  to  take  notice  of  in  defcribing  the  Lakes  of  Canada} 
Immediately,  upon  our  Landing,  the  Savages  fell  to  work  in 
cutting  down  Trees,  and  making  a  Redoubt  of  Stakes,  or 
Pales,  for  the  Security  of  our  Canows  and  Baggage,  and  for  a 
fafe  Retreat  to  our  felves  in  cafe  of  neceffity. 

The  20th  they  march'd,  each  Man  being  provided  with  a 
light  Covering,  a  Bow,  and  fome  Arrows,  (or  elfe  a  Fufee) 
and  a  little  Bag  containing  ten  pound  weight  of  the  Flowr  of 
the  Indian  Corn.  [95]  They  thought  it  mofl:  convenient  to 
keep  to  the  Banks  of  the  River,  upon  which  the  Goyogoans  are 


his  Mackinac  mission  of  St.  Ignace  ;  they  afterwards  settled  at  Detroit,  and  were 
known  to  the  English  as  Wyandots.  On  the  Iroquois  war  which  expelled  them  from 
their  ancient  home,  see  Parkman,  Jesuits,  pp.  403-410.  On  their  later  history  and 
migrations,  see  Shea,  in  Historical  Magazine,  v,  pp.  262-265.  -A-  remnant  still 
exists  on  a  reservation  near  Amherstburg,  Ont.  — Ed. 

^This  name,  "River  de  Conde,"  appears  to  be  peculiar  to  Lahontan,  from 
whom  Pownall  quotes  it  in  his  description  of  1754  (A^  y.  Colon.  Docs.,  vi,  p.  896). 
In  our  author's  later  description,  and  upon  his  map  he  exaggerates  the  size  and  length 
of  the  stream,  which  from  its  location  must  be  either  Mill  Creek,  Erie  County,  Pa., 
whence  the  portage  ran  to  the  sources  of  the  Allegheny,  or  Chautauqua  Creek,  in 
New  York,  whence  the  usual  portage  to  the  lake  of  that  name  was  about  six  miles. 
Scadding  thinks  it  was  Cattaraugus  Creek  ;  but  the  portage  thence  to  the  Allegheny 
was  much  longer  than  Lahontan  describes,  post.  —  Ed. 


156  Some  New  Voyages 

wont  to  fifh  for  Sturgeon;  for  that  Fifh,  which  is  fix  foot  in 
length,  comes  out  of  the  Lakes  in  hot  Weather,  and  fwims  up 
the  Rivers.^  They  had  refolv'd  Hkewife,  if  they  found  the 
Country  clear,  to  march  up  and  furprife  the  Villages  of  the 
Goyogoans :  but  they  were  foon  eas'd  of  that  trouble;  for  they 
had  not  march'd  two  days  when  their  Scouts  defcry'd  three 
hundred  Iroquefe :  and  on  the  other  hand  the  Iroquefe  fpy'd 
them  to  fuch  purpofe,  that  the  Scouts  efcap'd  very  narrowly, 
and  had  much  ado  to  return  to  the  body  of  the  Party,  which 
immediately  betook  themfelves  to  flight.  I  was  mightily  fur- 
pris'd  when  I  heard  the  Centinel  of  our  Redoubt  cry  out, 
AuxArmes^  our  Men  are  beaten  and  purfued ;  but  I  was  yet  more 
furpriz'd  when  I  faw  the  Fugitives  run  at  full  fpeed,  when 
there  was  no  body  behind  them.  When  they  came  up  they 
were  all  filent  for  half  an  hour,  purfuant  to  their  Ufe  and 
Wont ;  after  which  their  Leader  recounted  to  me  the  Particu- 
lars of  the  Adventure.  I  thought  at  firft  that  their  advanc'd 
Guards  had  miftook  the  number  of  the  Enemies ;  for  I  knew 
that  the  Outaoiias  had  not  the  Reputation  of  too  much  Cour- 
age :  but  the  next  day  a  Party  of  the  Iroquefe  appear'd  in  fight 
of  our  Redoubt,  which  gave  me  occafion  to  believe  that  they 
were  in  the  right  of  it.  Nay,  this  Truth  was  afterwards  con- 
firmed by  a  certain  Slave  call'd  Chaouanon,  who  made  his 
efcape  to  the  Redoubt,  and  affur'd  me,  that  the  Iroquefe  were 
not  lefs  than  four  hundred ;  to  which  he  added,  that  they 
expedted  to  be  joyn'd  by  fixty  more  that  had  march'd  fome 


^  Lahontan  here  correctly  describes  the  habits  of  the  lake  sturgeon  {Acipensev 
rubicundus)  which  spawns  in  the  small  streams.  —  Ed. 


J^7\  \lUJ.p.I.A\  T 

Jhii'A       \.UL[.iM        iaw.«        «««uA        .iiiMiLui        .i..n..i..       \imnit        | 


I 


to  7Vo;Y/6-America.  157 

Months  before  to  the  Country  of  the  Oumamis.  He  inform'd 
us  farther,  That  while  the  Marquis  de  Denonville  was  concert- 
ing meafures  for  a  Peace  with  the  five  Nations,  an  EngUPiman, 
of  the  Name  of  J  rid,  accompany'd  with  fome  others,  endeav- 
our'd  to  diffwade  them  from  Peace,  by  Orders  [96J  from  the 
Governour  of  New  Tork}  In  the  mean  time  the  Savages  hav- 
ing prefs'd  me  to  afTift  at  a  Council  of  War,  they  propos'd  to 
lie  by  for  a  fair  Wind,  and  then  to  embark.  They  repre- 
fented,  that  they  defign'd  to  fail  to  the  end  of  the  Lake,  where 
they  would  infallibly  light  upon  the  fixty  Iroquefe  that  I  men- 
tion'd  above ;  but  withal,  that  they  could  not  agree  to  fet  out 
in  a  Calm,  becaufe  that  after  their  quitting  the  Redoubt,  and 
launching  out,  a  contrary  Wind  might  force  'em  afhore,  where 
their  Throats  might  be  cut  if  the  Enemy  purfu'd  'em.  I 
reply'd,  That  'twas  then  fuch  fine  Weather,  that  we  had 
nothing  to  expedt  but  Calms ;  that  if  we  tarry'd  longer  in  this 
Place,  our  Enemies  would  thereby  gain  time  to  make  Canows 
in  order  to  a  Purfuit ;  that  fince  the  favourablenefs  of  the 
Wind  was  fo  uncertain,  we  ought  to  embark  without  lofs  of 
time ;  that  we  might  fail  in  the  Night,  and  fculk  in  the  Day- 
time behind  Rocks  and  Points  of  Land  ;  and,  that  by  this 
means  the  Enemy  would  be  at  a  lofs  to  know  whether  we  ftood 
to  the  South  or  to  the  North  fide  of  the  Lake.  The  Savages 
made  Anfwer,  That  'twas  true  their  tarrying  might  be  every 
way  prejudicial ;   but  'twas  equally  true,  that  my  Expedient 

^  For  the  negotiations  between  Governors  Denonville  and  Dongan,  see  A^.  T. 
Colon.  Docs.,  iii,  pp.  438-564  ;  ix,  388-404.  By  the  "  Englishman  Aria,"  Lahontan 
doubtless  intends  Arnout  Cornelisse  Viele,  whom  Dongan  employed  as  his  messenger 
to  the  Iroquois.  —  Ed. 


158  Some  New  Voyages 

was  dangerous :  However,  they  confented  to  embark  along 
with  us,  and  for  that  end  gumm'd  their  Canows.  We  embark'd 
on  the  24th  at  night,  and  the  Weather  being  fair,  clear,  and 
calm,  made  a  great  deal  of  way  that  night,  and  the  fucceeding 
day.  The  next  Evening  we  came  to  an  Anchor,  defigning  to 
fleep  for  three  or  four  hours,  but  not  to  ftir  out  of  the 
Canows.  About  Midnight  we  weigh'd  our  little  wooden 
Anchors,  and  one  half  of  the  Men  row'd  while  the  other  was 
at  reft.  Thus  did  we  continue  to  fteer  with  a  great  deal  of 
Precaution  and  Care,  rowing  all  night,  and  lying  by  all  day. 

July  28.  when  we  were  lying  almoft  all  afleep  in  a  Creek  of 
a  little  Ifland,  the  Watch  defcrying  fome  [97]  Canows  that 
made  towards  us,  wak'd  fome  Savages  that  had  gone  a-fhore 
to  fleep  the  more  conveniently.  The  Noife  having  alarm'd  us 
all,  we  prefently  made  our  felves  ready  to  get  in  head  of  thefe 
Canows  ;  but  at  the  fame  time,  tho'  we  were  but  half  a  League 
off,  we  could  not  diftinguifh  who  they  were,  by  reafon  that  the 
Sun-beams  falling  perpendicularly,  made  the  Surface  of  the 
Water  look  like  a  Looking-glafs.  Indeed  there  being  but 
two  of  'em,  we  reckon'd  they  were  mann'd  with  Iroqnefe^  and 
that  each  of  'em  contain'd  at  leaft  twenty  Men:  upon  which 
fufpicion,  the  Leader  of  the  Sauteurs  offered  to  go  a-fhore  with 
his  Men,  and  poft  himfelf  at  the  Entry  of  a  Wood,  from  whence 
he  would  foftly  follow  the  Canows  without  being  difcover'd, 
till  fuch  time  as  we  forc'd  'em  a-fliore.  At  the  fame  time  he 
propos'd  that  the  Outaouas  and  my  Detachment  fhould  fuffer 
'em  to  be  within  a  Musket-fhot  of  the  Ifland  before  we  dif- 
cover'd our  felves,  or  offer'd  to  give  'em  chafe,  upon  the 


to  iV(?r^/6- America.  159 

apprehenfion  that  If  we  follow'd  'em  clofer,  they  would  be  fo 
far  from  getting  on  fhore,  that  they  would  fight  as  defperate, 
and  choofe  rather  to  be  klll'd  or  drown'd  than  to  be  taken. 
This  Propofal  was  llk'd,  and  every  thing  was  manag'd  accord- 
ingly. As  foon  as  our  unknown  Enemy  perceiv'd  us,  they 
made  the  Shore  with  all  imaginable  Precipitation;  and  juft 
when  they  were  going  to  knock  their  Prifoners  on  the  Head, 
the  Sauteurs  fell  upon  'em,  but  mifs'd  of  their  aim  in  taking 
'em  all  alive;  for  they  fought  to  the  laft  gafp,  like  Men  that 
knew  no  Medium  betwixt  Conqueft  and  Death.  Una  falus 
vi£lis  nullam  fpej-are  falntem.  This  Engagement  happen'd  while 
we  landed :  however,  the  Sauteurs  came  off  with  Honour,  for 
they  loft  only  four  Men,  and  of  twenty  Iroquefe  they  kill'd 
three,  wounded  five,  and  took  the  reft  Prifoners,  fo  that  not 
one  of  'em  efcap'd.  The  Iroquefe  had  along  with  them  eighteen 
Slaves  of  the  Oumamis,  who  were  all  wounded,  and  feven  big- 
belly'd  [98]  Women,  from  whom  we  had  Intelligence  that  the 
reft  of  their  Party  were  then  upon  their  Return  by  Land  upon 
the  Banks  of  the  Lake,  having  thirty  four  Prifoners,  of  both 
Sexes;  and  that  they  could  not  then  be  far  oflF.  When  this 
Intelligence  was  laid  before  us,  the  Outaouas  were  of  the  opinion 
that  we  fhould  reft  fatisfied  with  the  Feats  we  had  done,  upon 
the  Plea  that  the  above-mention'd  four  hundred  Iroquefe  would 
certainly  get  before  us.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Sauteurs  main- 
tain'd  that  they  had  rather  perifh  than  fail  to  attempt  the 
Refcue  of  thefe  Prifoners,  and  the  Defeat  of  the  whole  Party; 
and  that  if  no  body  would  fecond  'em,  they  would  make  the 
Attempt    by  themfelves.      The    Bravery  of   this    Refolution 


i6o  Some  New  Voyages 

oblig'd  me  to  encourage  and  egg  on  the  Outaoiias.  I  remon- 
ftrated  to  'em,  that  in  regard  the  Saiiteurs  Ingrofs'd  the  Glory 
of  the  former  A6lion,  they  had  more  reafon  than  we  to  decline 
the  rifque  of  a  fecond  Engagement:  that  if  we  refus'd  to  back 
'em,  our  Cowardice  would  cover  us  with  everlafting  Infamy : 
and,  that  in  order  to  render  the  Attack  more  fecure,we  ought 
to  ufe  a  fpeedy  Precaution  in  finding  out  fome  Point  or  Elbow 
of  Land  where  our  Canows,  our  Baggage,  and  our  Prifoners 
might  be  lodg'd  fafe.  The  Outaouas  had  a  great  deal  of  Re- 
ludancy  to  the  matter  ;  however,  after  confulting  among  them- 
felves,  they  comply'd  with  the  Propofal,  more  for  Shame,  than 
out  of  true  Courage.  Having  laid  down  that  joint  Refolution, 
we  made  up  a  little  fort  of  a  Fence  in  feven  or  eight  hours, 
and  then  fent  out  Scouts  on  all  hands,  while  the  main  Body 
was  kept  in  readinefs  to  march  upon  the  firft  Alarm. 

Aiiguft  4.  two  of  our  Spies  return'd  upon  full  fpeed,  to 
acquaint  us  that  the  h'oquefe  were  not  above  three  Leagues 
off,  and  that  they  advanc'd  towards  us ;  and  withal,  that  upon 
the  Road  there  was  a  little  Brook,  upon  which  an  Ambufcado 
might  be  conveniently  laid.  This  Advice  animated  our  Sav- 
ages fo  much,  [99]  that  they  run  immediately  to  take  Poffef- 
fion  of  that  Advantageous  Poft :  but  they  knew  not  how  to 
make  the  right  ufe  of  it.  The  Outaouas  were  too  hafty  in  firing  ; 
and  by  fhooting  at  too  great  a  diftance,  gave  all  the  Enemies 
an  opportunity  of  making  their  Efcape,  abating  for  ten  or 
twelve  whofe  Heads  were  brought  into  the  little  Fort  v/here  I 
ftay'd.  The  Slaves  indeed  were  all  retaken,  and  fo  refcued 
from  the  Cruelty  of  thefe  Tygers ;  which  encourag'd  us  to 


to  iVor^Z'- America.  i6i 

reft  fatisfied.  When  the  Expedition  was  over,  we  ftow'd  thefe 
poor  Wretches  in  our  Canows,  and  fteer'd  with  all  Expedition 
to  the  Streight  or  Neck  of  the  Lake  of  Hiiron^  which  we  made 
on  the  13th.  We  enjoy'd  a  great  deal  of  Pleafure  in  ftemming 
the  Current  of  that  Streight ;  the  Iflands  of  which,  that  I 
mention'd  above,  were  cover'd  with  Roe  bucks.  This  oppor- 
tunity we  did  not  flight;  nor  did  we  grudge  our  flopping 
upon  thefe  Iflands  for  eight  days ;  during  which  time  we  were 
bufied  in  Hunting,  and  refrefh'd  our  felves  with  plenty  of 
excellent  Fruit  that  was  fully  ripe.  Here  the  wounded  and 
retaken  Prifoners  had  an  opportunity  of  refting,  and  of  drink- 
ing the  Broth  of  feveral  forts  of  Meat ;  and  we  had  time  to 
broil  as  much  Meat  as  we  could  flow  in  our  Canows,  not  to 
mention  the  great  numbers  of  Turkeys  that  we  were  oblig'd 
to  eat  upon  the  fpot,  for  fear  that  the  heat  of  the  Seafon  would 
fpoil  'em. 

In  that  fpace  of  time  the  poor  wounded  Savages  were 
carefully  purg'd  with  fuch  Roots  as  the  Americans  are  well 
vers'd  in ;  which  I  mean  to  explain  to  you  in  its  proper  time 
and  place ;  and  they  wanted  not  good  Reftoratives  of  Jelly- 
broth.  The  24th  we  re-embark'd,  and  arriv'd  at  Night  at 
Fort  St.  Jofeph,  where  I  found  a  Party  of  eighty  Oumamis 
commanded  by  one  Michitonka,  who  being  lately  return'd 
from  Niagara^  expeded  my  Arrival  with  the  utmoft  impa- 
tience. When  I  landed,  I  was  furpris'd  to  fee  the  [100]  Fort 
cramm'd  with  Savages;  but  on  the  other  hand,  they  were 
equally  aftonifli'd  to  find  in  our  Company  their  Country-men, 

to  whofe  hard  Fortune  they  had  been  altogether  Strangers. 
11 


1 62  Some  New  Voyages 

The  joyful  Meeting  fill'd  the  Air  with  Acclamations,  and 
Panegyricks  rung  all  about  to  an  extravagant  degree.  I  wifh, 
Sir,  you  had  been  there  to  partake  of  the  Pleafure  of  fo  fine  a 
Show  :  had  you  been  prefent,  you  would  have  join'd  with  me 
in  owning  that  all  our  French  Rhetorick  cannot  reach  fuch 
pithy  and  fignificant  Figures,  efpecially  upon  the  fcore  of 
Hyperboles,  as  made  up  the  bulk  of  the  Harangues  and  Songs 
that  thefe  poor  People  utter'd  with  Rapture  and  Tranfport. 
Michhonka  acquainted  me,  that  after  he  went  to  the  Fort  of 
Niagara,  with  a  Defign  to  make  fome  Expedition  into  the 
Country  of  the  Tfonontouans,  he  found  that  the  Scurvey  had 
made  fuch  a  terrible  havock  in  that  Fort,  that  it  had  fweept  off 
the  Commander,  and  all  the  Soldiers,  bating  twelve,  who  had 
the  good  luck  to  get  over  it,  as  well  as  Mr.  de  Bergeres,  who 
by  the  advantage  of  a  hale  Conftitution  had  ftemm'd  the  raging 
Violence  of  that  Diftemper.^  He  inform'd  me  farther.  That 
Mr.  Bergeres  having  refolv'd  to  fet  out  with  his  twelve  Men 
for  the  Fort  of  Frontenac,  had  defir'd  of  him  a  Reinforcement 
of  fome  young  Oumamis,  which  was  granted  him ;  that  after 
Mr.  Bergeres  had  embark'd,  himfelf  march'd  over  Land  to  the 
Country  of  the  Onnontagiies,  where  he  rejoin'd  the  Reinforce- 
ment he  had  granted  to  Mr.  de  Bergeres,  and  underftood  from 
them,  that  during  the  Winter  the  Scurvey  had  carried  off  as 
many  Soldiers  at  Fort  Frontenac  as  at  Niagara  ;  and,  that  Mr. 
de  Denonville  was  negotiating  a  Peace  with  the  Iroquefe. 

The  Governour  of  Fort  Frontenac  had  requefted  Michitonka 


1  For  the  official  report  of  this  disaster,  and  the  abandonment  of  the  fort  at 
Niagara,  see  A^.  Y.  Colon.  Docs.,  ix,  pp.  386-388.  — Ed. 


to  A^or^/6- America.  163 

to  engage  in  no  Enterprife,  and  to  return  home  with  his  Men; 
upon  which  that  Leader  being  in  full  March  homeward,  was 
attack'd  by  three  hundred  [id]  Onnontagiies,  whom  he  durft 
not  engage  otherwife  than  in  a  running  Fight,  by  which  he 
loft  four  Men.  Being  inform'd  of  all  thefe  Circumftances,  I 
confulted  with  the  three  different  Nations  that  were  then 
pofted  in  my  Fort.  After  a  mature  Refledlion  upon  the  Intel- 
ligence that  was  laid  before  'em,  they  came  to  this  Refolution; 
That  fince  the  Marquis  de  Denonmlle  had  a  mind  to  clap  up  a 
Peace,  and  the  Fort  oi  Niagara  was  abdicated,  the  Fort  I  then 
commanded  would  be  of  no  ufe ;  that  fince  I  had  neither  Pro- 
vifions  nor  Ammunition  for  above  two  Months,  I  fhould  be 
oblig'd  at  the  end  of  thefe  two  Months  to  retreat  to  the  Place 
from  whence  I  now  write ;  that  at  that  time  of  the  Year  our 
Navigation  would  be  uneafie  and  dangerous;  that  in  regard  I 
lay  under  an  indifpenfible  neceflity  of  making  my  Retreat, 
'twas  of  no  great  moment  whether  I  march'd  off  two  Months 
fooner  or  later;  and,  in  fine,  that  fince  I  had  receiv'd  no  frefli 
Orders,  nor  no  Succors,  'twas  my  Bufinefs  to  go  off  along 
with  them.  This  Refolution,  which  was  a  fufficient  Argument 
to  fway  me,  afforded  matter  of  joy  to  the  Soldiers,  who  were 
afraid  of  being  oblig'd  to  a  more  rigorous  courfe  of  Abfti- 
nence  in  that  Poft  than  they  had  formerly  undergone ;  for  the 
meafures  of  a  critical  Abftinence  do  not  fit  well  upon  a 
Soldiers  Stomach.  In  fine,  purfuant  to  our  joint  Refolution, 
we  fet  fire  to  the  Fort  on  the  27th,  and  embarked  that  fame 
day,  and  keeping  clofe  to  the  South  fhore  of  the  Lake  that  I 
took  notice  of  in  my  laft,  arriv'd  here  on  the  loth  oi  September. 


164  Some  New  Voyages 

The  Oimamis  march'd  over  Land  to  their  own  Country,  and 
carry'd  with  'em  the  Wounded,  who  were  then  in  a  condition 
to  march. 

Upon  my  Arrival  in  this  Place,  I  found  here  Mr.  de  la 
Durantayy  whom  Mr.  Denonville  has  inverted  with  the  Com- 
miffion  of  Commander  of  the  Coiireurs  de  Bois  that  trade  upon 
the  Lakes,  and  in  the  Southern  Countries  of  Canada.  The 
Governour  has  fent  me  [102]  Orders  to  return  to  the  Colony 
if  the  Seafon  and  other  Circumftances  permit ;  or  to  tarry  here 
till  the  Spring  if  I  forefee  unfurmountable  Difficulties  in  the 
Paffage.  In  the  mean  time  he  has  fent  me  Effedls  to  anfwer 
the  Pay  of  my  Detachment,  and  to  fubfift  'em  in  the  Winter. 
Thefe  Orders  would  be  extream  acceptable  to  me,  if  I  could 
but  contrive  how  to  return  to  the  Colony;  but  that  feems  to 
be  abfolutely  impoffible,  and  both  the  French  and  the  Savages 
agree  that  it  is  fo.  There  are  in  that  Paffage  fo  many  Water- 
falls, Catarads,  and  Places  where  there's  a  necefTity  of  tedious 
Land-carriages,  that  I  dare  not  run  fuch  Hazards  with  my 
Soldiers,  who  cannot  work  the  Boats  but  upon  ftagnating 
Water.  Upon  that  confideration  I  have  thought  it  more 
proper  to  halt  here  till  the  next  Year ;  at  which  time  I  defign 
to  take  the  Advantage  of  the  Company  of  fome  Frenchmen 
and  Savages,  that  promife  to  take  into  each  of  their  Canows 
one  of  my  Men.  In  the  mean  time,  I  am  upon  the  point  of 
undertaking  another  Voyage,  for  I  cannot  mew  my  felf  up 
here  all  this  Winter.  I  defign  to  make  the  beft  ufe  of  my  time, 
and  to  travel  through  the  Southern  Countries  that  I  have  fo 


to  7Vor^i>- America.  165 

often  heard  of,  having  engag'd  four  or  five  good  Huntfmen 
of  the  Outaouas  to  go  along  with  me. 

The  Party  of  the  Hiirons  that  I  mention'd  in  the  beginning 
of  my  Letter,  return'd  hither  two  Months  ago,  and  brought 
with  'em  an  Iroqiiefe  Slave,  whom  their  Leader  prefented  to 
Mr.  de  luchereau,  the  late  Colonel  of  the  Coiireurs  de  Bois 
and  whom  that  Colonel  order'd  to  be  Immediately  fhot.  The 
crafty  Leader  adled  upon  that  occafion  a  very  cunning  and 
malicious  part,  the  fatal  Confequences  of  which  I  eafily  fore- 
fee:  He  intrufted  no  body  with  the  Secret  but  my  felf ;  for 
he  is  my  true  Friend,  and  he  knows  that  I  am  his.  However, 
I  muft  go  no  farther  upon  this  matter,  left  my  Letter  fhould 
be  intercepted.  Tho'  after  all,  if  the  Blow  were  not  already 
given,  [103]  or  if  'twere  pofTible  to  remedy  it,  my  Friendfhip 
fhould  not  hinder  me  from  acquainting  Mr.  de  Deiionville with 
the  Intrigue,  that  he  might  get  clear  of  it  as  well  as  he  could. 
If  it  pleafes  God  to  allow  me  a  fafe  Return  to  France^  I  fhall 
tell  you  the  Story  by  word  of  mouth. 

I  underftand  by  your  laft,  that  the  King  has  preferr'd  his 
Almoner,  the  Abbot  of  St.  Falters,  to  the  Bifhoprick  of  Quebec ; 
and  that  this  Bifhop  was  confecrated  in  St.  Sulpice^s  Church.^ 


^  The  Abbe  de  St.  Vallier  had  been  Bishop  Laval's  vicar-apostolic  since  1685  ; 
but  at  the  desire  of  the  latter  was  consecrated  bishop,  Jan.  25,  1688.  Jean  Bap- 
tiste  de  la  Croix  Chevriere,  known  as  St.  Vallier  from  his  benefice,  was  a  native  of 
Grenoble  (1653)  who  had  served  as  chaplain  of  Louis  XIV.  He  was  second  bishop 
of  Quebec,  retaining  the  office  until  his  death  (1727).  During  his  long  term  of  service, 
he  was  frequently  absent  in  France  (1694-97);  again  (1700-04),  when  he  was  cap- 
tured by  the  English  on  his  return  voyage,  and  kept  a  prisoner  five  years.  He  did 
not  finally  reach  Quebec  until  1713.  For  his  portrait  see  Jes.  Rel.,  Ixiv,  frontis- 
piece. —  Ed. 


1 66  Some  New  Voyages 

This  piece  of  News  would  be  very  welcome  to  me,  if  I  thought 
he  would  be  lefs  rigid  than  Mr.  de  Lavaly  his  Predeceffor. 
But  what  likelyhood  is  there  that  the  new  Bifhop  will  be  of  a 
tradable  temper?  If  'tis  true  that  he  has  refus'd  other  good 
Bifliopricks,  he  muft  be  as  fcrupulous  as  the  M.onk  Dracontius, 
that  St.  Athanafius  cenfures  for  not  accepting  of  a  Prefentation 
to  a  Bifhoprick  that  was  ofifer'd  him.  In  fine,  if  he  is  of  that 
fcrupulous  Temper,  his  critical  Stridnefs  will  fcarce  go  down 
in  this  Country ;  for  the  People  are  already  tyr'd  out  with  his 
Predeceffor's  Excommunications. 

/  am^ 

SIR, 

Tours,  &c. 


to  iVo;tZ>- America.  167 


[104]  LETTER  XVI. 
Dated  at  Mijjilimakinac^  May  28.  1689. 
Containing  an  Account  of  the  Author's  Departure  from^  and  Return 
to,  Miflilimakinac.  A  Defcription  of  the  Bay  of  Puants,  and 
its  Villages.  An  ample  Defcription  of  the  Beavers  ;  follow'' d  by 
the  Journal  of  a  remarkable  Voyage  upon  the  Long  River ^  and 
a  Map  of  the  adjacent  Country. 

SIR, 

THANK  God,  I  am  now  return'd  from  my  Voyage  upon 
the  Lofig  River,  which  falls  into  the  River  oi  Miffifipi.  I 
would  willingly  have  trac'd  it  up  to  its  Source,  if  feveral  Ob- 
ftacles  had  not  flood  in  my  way.  I  fet  out  from  hence  the 
24th  of  Sept.  accompany'd  with  my  own  Detachment,  and  the 
five  Huntfmen  I  mention'd  in  my  laft ;  who  indeed  did  me  a 
great  deal  of  Service.  All  the  Soldiers  were  provided  with 
new  Canows  loaded  with  Provifions  and  Ammunition,  and 
fuch  Commodities  as  are  proper  for  the  Savages.  The  Wind, 
which  ftood  then  in  the  North,  wafted  me  in  three  days  to  the 
Bay  of  Fouteouatamis,  that  lay  forty  Leagues  off.  The  mouth 
of  that  Bay  is  in  a  manner  choak'd  with  Ifles,  and  the  Bay  it 
felf  is  ten  Leagues  broad,  and  twenty  five  Leagues  long.^ 

^  Now  Green  Bay,  Wis.,  usually  called  by  the  French  Baye  des  Puants;  see 
p.  146,  note  2,  ante.  Charlevoix  says  that  the  Potawatomi  formerly  inhabited  these 
islands  at  the  mouth  of  the  bay,  after  being  driven  by  the  Iroquois  from  their  seats  in 
lower  Michigan.  —  Ed. 


1 68  Some  New  Voyages 

The  29th  we  came  to  a  little  deep  fort  of  a  River,  which 
difembogues  at  a  place  where  the  Water  of  the  Lake  fwells 
three  foot  high  in  twelve  hours,  and  decreafes  as  much  in  the 
fame  compafs  of  time.  Our  tarrying  there  three  or  four  days 
gave  me  an  opportunity  of  making  this  Remark.^  The  Villa- 
ges of  the  Sakis^  the  Pouteouatamis,  and  fome  Malominis,  are 
[105]  feated  on  the  fide  of  that  River,  and  the  Jefuits  have  a 
Houfe  or  College  built  upon  it.^  This  is  a  place  of  great 
Trade  for  Skins  and  Indian  Corn,  which  thefe  Savages  fell  to 
the  Coureurs  de  Bois,  as  they  come  and  go,  it  being  the  neareft 
and  moft  convenient  Paffage  to  the  River  of  Mijfifipl  The 
Soil  of  this  Country  is  fo  fertile,  that  it  produces  (in  a  man- 
ner without  Agriculture)  our  European  Corn,  Peafe,  Beans, 
and  feveral  other  Fruits  that  are  not  known  in  France.  As 
foon  as  I  landed,  the  Warriours  of  thefe  three  Nations  came 
by  turns  to  my  Apartment,  to  regale  me  with  the  Calumet- 
Dance,  and  with  the  Captains-Dance ;  the  former  being  a  figni- 
fication  of  Peace  and  Friendfhip,  and  the  latter  of  Refped 

1  The  Fox  River,  first  called  by  the  French  Riviere  des  Puants,  later  Riviere 
des  Renards  (Foxes)  from  the  tribe  encountered  on  its  banks.  The  Jesuits  entitled 
it  St.  Francis  River,  but  the  name  did  not  persist.  The  Jesuits  also  remarked  the 
tides  in  the  bay.  See  Jes.  Rel.,  Ivi,  pp.  137-139;  Iv'i.  PP-  301-30S  ;  'x.  pp. 
205-207.  — Ed. 

2  The  Sauk,  Potawatomi,  and  Menominee  tribes  were  all  of  Algonquian  stock, 
and  had  their  habitat  about  the  mouth  of  the  Fox,  although  the  latter  tribe  were  more 
often  upon  the  river  of  the  same  name. 

The  Jesuit  mission  of  St.  Francis  Xavier  was  founded  on  the  shores  of  Green  Bay 
by  Father  Claude  Allouez  in  1669  ;  two  years  later  a  chapel  was  built  upon  the  site  of 
the  present  city  of  De  Pere.  In  1899  the  citizens  of  that  place,  inspired  thereto  by  the 
Wisconsin  Historical  Society,  erected  a  monument  near  the  site  of  this  pioneer  mis- 
sionary station.     See  Wis.  His.  Soc.  Proc,  1899,  p.  105.  — Ed. 


to  North- Avs\mc2i.  169 

and  Efteem.^  I  return'd  the  Compliment  with  a  Prefent  of 
fome  Rolls  of  Brafil  Tobacco,  which  they  value  mightily,  and 
fome  ftrings  of  Venice  Beads,  with  which  they  embroider  their 
Coats.  Next  Morning  I  was  invited  to  a  Feaft  with  one  of 
the  three  Nations ;  and  after  having  fent  to  'em  fome  Difhes 
and  Plates,  purfuant  to  the  Cuftom  of  the  Country,  I  went 
accordingly  about  Noon.  They  began  with  congratulating 
my  Arrival,  and  after  I  had  return'd  them  thanks,  fell  a  finging 
and  dancing  one  after  another,  in  a  particular  manner,  of 
which  you  may  expedl  a  circumftantial  account  when  I  have 
more  leifure.  The  Singing  and  Dancing  lafted  for  two  hours, 
being  feafon'd  with  Acclamations  of  Joy  and  Jefts,  which  make 
up  part  of  their  ridiculous  Mufick.  After  that  the  Slaves 
came  to  ferve,^  and  all  the  Company  fat  down  after  the  Eaftern 
fafhion,  every  one  being  provided  with  his  Mefs,  juft  as  our 
Monks  are  in  the  Monaftery-Halls. 

Firft  of  all  four  Platters  were  fet  down  before  me,  in  the 
firft  of  which  there  were  two  white  Fifh  only  boil'd  in  Water ; 
in  the  fecond  the  Tongue  and  Breaft  of  a  Roe-buck  boil'd  ;  in 
the  third  two  Woodhens,  the  hind  Feet  or  Trotters  of  a  Bear, 
and  [106]  the  Tail  of  a  Beaver,  all  roafled  ;  and  the  fourth 
contain'd  a  large  quantity  of  Broth  made  of  feveral  forts  of 


1  For  the  calumet  dance  see  Marquette's  detailed  description  in  ^'^j.  ReL,  lix, 
pp.  129-137.  In  its  modern  form  it  is  described  in  U.  S.  Bur.  of  Ethnol.  Report, 
1881-82,  pp.  276-282.  —  Ed. 

2  Slavery  among  the  Indians  was  due  entirely  to  prisoners  taken  in  war.  It 
was  a  mild  form,  slaves  being  usually  treated  as  members  of  the  family,  and  having 
the  hope  of  exchange  or  ransom  by  their  own  tribe.  From  the  Indians  it  spread  to  the 
French  in  Illinois,  and  was  authorized  by  edict  in  1709.  SeeLafontaine,  "Del'esclavage 
en  Canada,"  in  Montreal  Historical  Society  Memoires,  1858.  —  Ed. 


170  Some  New  Voyages 

Meat.  For  Drink  they  gave  me  a  very  pleafant  Liquor,  which 
was  nothing  but  a  Syrrup  of  Maple  beat  up  with  Water ;  but 
of  this  more  elfewhere.  The  Feaft  lafted  two  Hours ;  after 
which  I  intreated  one  of  the  Grandees  to  fing  for  me  ;  for  in 
all  the  Ceremonies  made  ufe  of  among  the  Savages,  'tis  cuf- 
tomary  to  imploy  another  to  a61:  for  'em.  I  made  this  Grandee 
a  Prefent  of  fome  pieces  of  Tobacco,  in  order  to  oblige  him 
to  a6t  my  part  till  Night.  Next  day,  and  the  day  after,  I  was 
oblig'd  to  go  to  the  Feafts  of  the  other  two  Nations,  who  ob- 
ferv'd  the  fame  Formalities.  The  moft  curious  thing  I  faw  in 
the  Villages,  was  ten  or  twelve  tame  Beavers,  that  went  and 
came  like  Dogs  from  the  Rivers  to  the  Cottages,  without 
ftragling  out  of  the  Road.  I  ask'd  the  Savages  if  thefe  Ani- 
mals could  live  out  of  the  Water  ;  and  receiv'd  this  anfwer, 
that  they  could  live  afhoar  as  well  as  Dogs,  and  that  they  had 
kept  fome  of  'em  above  a  year,  without  fuffering  them  to  go 
near  the  Rivers  :  From  whence  I  conclude,  that  the  Cafuijis  are 
out  in  not  ranging  Ducks,  Geefe,  and  Teals,  in  the  number  of 
Amphibious  Animals,  as  the  Naturalifts  are  wont  to  do.  I 
had  heard  the  fame  ftory  from  feveral  Americans  before ;  but 
being  apprehenfive  that  there  were  different  Species  of 
Beavers,  I  had  a  mind  to  be  better  inform'd  :  And  indeed 
there  is  a  particular  kind  of  'em,  which  the  Savages  call  the 
Terreftrial,  or  Land-Beaver  ;  but  at  the  fame  time  they  tell  you, 
thefe  are  of  a  different  Species  from  the  Amphibious  fort ;  for 
they  make  Holes  or  Dens  in  the  Earth,  like  Rabbets  or  Foxes, 
and  never  go  near  the  Water  unlefs  it  be  to  drink.  They  are 
likewife  call'd  by  the  Savages,  the  lazy  or  idle  kind,  as  being 


to  7Vor^Z>- America.  171 

expell'd  by  the  other  Beavers  from  the  Kennels  in  which  thefe 
Animals  are  lodg'd,  to  the  [107]  number  of  80.  Thefe  Ken- 
nels I  mean  to  defcribe  afterwards ;  in  the  mean  time  I  only 
take  occafion  to  acquaint  you,  that  the  idle  fort  being  unwilling 
to  work,  are  expell'd  by  the  others,  juft  as  Wafps  are  by  Bees ; 
and  are  fo  teas'd  by  'em,  that  they  are  forc'd  to  quit  the  Ken- 
nels, which  the  better  and  more  induftrious  Race  huddles  up 
to  themfelves  in  the  Fens.  This  fupine  Beaver  refembles  the 
other  fort  in  its  Figure,  excepting  that  the  Hair  is  rub'd  off 
the  Back  and  the  Belly,  which  is  occafion'd  by  their  rubbing 
againft  the  Earth  when  they  return  to,  or  ftir  out  from  their 
Holes.i 

The  Writers  of  Natural  Hiftory  are  very  much  out,  in 
fancying  that  the  Beavers  cut  off  their  own  Tefticles,  when 
purfued  by  the  Huntfmen ;  for  that  which  the  Phyficians  call 
Caftoreum,  is  not  lodg'd  in  the  Tefticles,  but  in  a  certain  Bag 
that  Nature  feems  to  have  form'd  on  purpofe  for  thefe  Ani- 
mals, and  this  Bag  they  make  ufe  of  to  clear  their  Teeth,  after 
the  biting  of  fome  gummy  Shrub.  But  fuppofing  the  Tefticles 
to  be  the  proper  Receptacle  of  the  Caftor,  we  muft  ftill  con- 
ceive that  'tis  impoftible  for  a  Beaver  to  pull  out  his  Tefticles, 
without  rending  the  Nerves  of  the  Groin,  in  which  they  are 
feated  juft  by  the  Sharebone.  'Tis  manifeft  that  Elian  and 
feveral  other  Naturalifts,  were  fcarce  acquainted  with  Beaver- 
hunting  ;  for  had  they  known  any  thing  of  the  matter,  they 


^The  beaver  is  easily  domesticated,  and  becomes  as  tame  as  a  kitten.  Stories 
of  idle  beavers  are  numerous,  but  apochryphal  ;  they  arise  from  some  disorder  in  the 
form  of  a  parasite,  which  occasionally  attacks  the  animal.  See  Martin,  Castorologia, 
or  the  Canadian  Beaver  (London  and  Montreal,  1892),  pp.  157,  168,  233.  —  Ed. 


172  Some  New  Voyages 

would  never  have  talk'd  of  the  purfulng  of  thefe  Animals, 
which  never  go  from  the  fide  of  the  Pond  where  their  Kennels 
are  built ;  and  which  dive  under  water  upon  the  leaft  noife, 
and  return  to  their  Dens  v/hen  the  danger  is  over.  If  thefe 
Creatures  were  but  fenfible  of  the  reafon  for  which  War  is 
declar'd  againft  'em,  they  would  flea  themfelves  alive ;  for  'tis 
their  Skin  only  that  the  Huntfmen  want,  the  value  of  the 
Caftor  being  nothing  in  comparifon  with  that.  A  great  Beaver 
is  twenty  fix  Inches  long,  from  [108]  the  hind-Head,  to  the 
root  of  the  Tail.  'Tis  about  three  Foot  and  eight  Inches 
round,  its  Head  is  feven  Inches  long,  and  fix  broad ;  its  Tail 
is  fourteen  Inches  long,  and  fix  broad,  and  about  the  middle 
it  has  the  thicknefs  of  an  Inch  and  two  lines.  The  figure  of 
the  Tail  is  Oval ;  the  Scale  with  which  'tis  cover'd,  and  which 
performs  the  Office  of  what  the  Phyficians  call  the  Epidermis 
or  Scarf-skin,  is  an  irregular  Hexagon.  The  Beaver  carries 
upon  its  Tail  the  Clay,  the  Earth  and  other  Materials  of  which 
they  make  their  Banks  and  Kennels,  or  Hutts,  by  a  wonderful 
Inftind.  Its  Ears  are  fhort,  round  and  hollow;  its  Legs  are 
five  Inches  long,  its  Feet  fix  Inches  and  eight  Lines,  and  its 
Paws  are  three  Inches  and  a  half  from  the  Heel  to  the  end  of 
the  great  Toe.  Its  Paws  are  form'd  much  like  a  Man's  Hand, 
and  they  make  ufe  of  'em  in  feeding,  as  Apes  do.  The  five 
Toes  are  joyn'd  like  thofe  of  a  Duck,  v/ith  a  Membrane  of  a 
Slate  colour.  Its  Eyes  are  of  the  leffer  fize,  in  proportion  to 
the  bulk  of  its  Body,  and  bear  the  figure  of  a  Rats  Eyes. 
Before  its  Muzzle  there  are  four  Fore-Teeth  or  Cutters,  viz. 


to  iVor^^- America.  173 

two  in  each  Jaw,  as  in  a  Rabbet,  befides  which  it  has  fixteen 
Grinders,  that  is,  eight  in  the  upper,  and  as  many  in  the  lower 
Mandible.  The  Cutters  are  above  an  Inch  long,  and  ]i  of  an 
Inch  broad,  being  very  ftrong  and  fharp  like  a  Cutlas ;  for  a 
Beaver  afiifted  by  its  Affociates,  (if  I  may  fo  call  its  fellow 
Beavers)  cuts  down  Trees  as  big  as  a  Hogfhead ;  which  I 
could  never  have  believ'd,  if  I  had  not  obferv'd  with  my  own 
Eyes,  above  twenty  Trunks  of  Trees  cut  down  in  that  fafhion. 
A  Beaver  has  two  lays  of  Hair ;  one  is  long,  and  of  a  fhining 
black  colour,  with  a  grain  as  big  as  that  of  Mans  Hair;  the 
other  is  fine  and  fmooth,  and  in  Winter  fifteen  lines  long :  In 
a  word,  the  laft  is  the  fineft  Down  in  the  World.  The  Skin 
of  fuch  a  Beaver  as  I  have  now  defcrib'd,  will  be  two  pound 
weight,  but  the  [109]  price  varies  according  to  the  goodnefs. 
In  Winter  and  Autumn  the  Flefh  of  a  Beaver  eats  very  well, 
if  it  be  roafted.  Thus,  Sir,  I  have  prefented  you  with  an  exadl 
Defcription  of  thefe  reputed  Amphibious  Animals  which  make 
fuch  Strudures,  that  all  the  Art  of  Man  can  fcarce  equal. 
Upon  another  occafion  perhaps  I  may  give  you  a  circumftan- 
tial  Account  of  their  wonderful  Structure,  which  I  decline  at 
prefent,  becaufe  the  Digreffion  would  be  too  tedious.^ 

To  return  to  my  Voyage.  After  our  arrival  in  the  Bay  of 
Pouteouatamis,  we  bid  adieu  to  the  Navigation  upon  the  Lakes 
of  Canada  ;  and  fetting  out  September  30,  arriv'd  October  2.  at 
the  foot  of  the  fall  of  Kakalin,  after  ftemming  fome  little  Cur- 


1  Lahontan's  description  of  the  beaver  is  not  inaccurate,  and  shows  habits  of  keen 
observation.     For  full  description  see  Martin,  op,  cit.  —  Ed. 


174  Some  New  Voyages 

rents  In  the  River  of  Piiants}  The  next  day  we  accompUfh'd 
the  fmall  Land-carriage,  and  on  the  c^th  arriv'd  before  the  Vil- 
lage of  KikapouSy  in  the  Neighbourhood  of  which  I  incamp'd 
the  next  day,  in  order  to  receive  IntelHgence.  That  Village 
ftands  upon  the  brink  of  a  little  Lake,  in  which  the  Savages 
fifh  great  quantities  of  Pikes  and  Gudgeons.^  I  found  only 
thirty  or  forty  Men  fit  for  War  in  the  place,  for  the  reft  were 
gone  a  Beaver-hunting  fome  days  before.  The  jtb  I  reim- 
barq'd,  and  rowing  hard  made  in  the  Evening  the  little  Lake 
of  Malominis,  where  we  kill'd  Bucks  and  Buftards  enough  for 
Supper.  We  went  afhoar  that  Night,  and  built  Hutts  for  our 
felves  upon  a  point  of  Land  that  fhoots  out ;  by  break  of  day 
I  v/ent  in  a  Canow  to  the  Village,  and  after  an  hours  Confer- 
ence with  fome  of  the  Savages,  prefented  'em  with  two  Rolls 
of  Tobacco,  and  they  by  way  of  Acknowledgment,  made  me 
a  prefent  of  two  or  three  Sacks  of  Oatmeal :  For  the  fides  of 


^The  Grand  Kakaling,  twenty-one  miles  from  the  mouth  of  Fox  River,  was  a 
series  of  rapids,  the  river  falling  fifty-two  feet  in  the  course  of  a  mile.  The  name  sig- 
nified "  the  fishing  ground  for  pickerel."  The  modern  town  of  Kaukauna  is  on  the 
river  bank  at  this  place.  See  Tanner,  "Early  Kaukauna  "  in  fFis.  Hist.  Soc.  Proc, 
1899,  pp.  212-217.  The  other  rapids  of  Fox  River,  ascending  from  the  mouth, 
were  those  at  De  Pere,  Little  Kakalin  (now  called  Little  Rapids) ,  the  Croche  (above 
Wrightstown),  Grand  Kakalin  (at  Kaukauna),  Little  Chute  (still  so  named),  the 
Cedars  (at  Kimberly),  Grand  Chute  (at  Appleton),  and  Winnebago  Rapids  (at 
Neenah).     See  Jes.  Rel.,  liv,  p.  306.  —  Ed. 

2  The  Kickapoo  were  an  Algonquian  tribe  closely  associated  with  the  Mascoutin. 
They  were  first  encountered  in  Wisconsin,  but  drifted  over  various  portions  of  Mich- 
igan and  Illinois,  finally  crossing  the  Mississippi  (about  1725),  and  making  their 
homes  in  Iowa.  See  iris.  Hist.  Colls.,  xvi,  xvii,  index.  A  remnant  of  this  tribe  still 
exists  upon  reservations  in  Kansas  and  Oklahoma.  The  village  mentioned  here  by 
Lahontan  is  not  described  by  his  contemporaries.  It  would  seem  to  have  been  on 
Lake  Winnebago,  between  Neenah  and  Oshkosh.  —  Ed. 


to  N orth- Ammc^..  175 

the  Lake  are  cover'd  with  a  fort  of  Oats,  which  grows  in  tufts 
with  a  tall  Stalk,  and  of  which  the  Savages  reap  plentiful 
Crops.^  The  ()th  I  arriv'd  at  the  foot  of  Ouiagamis  Fort, 
where  I  found  but  [no]  few  People;  however,  they  gave  me 
a  very  kind  Reception,  for  after  dancing  the  Calumet  before 
the  Door  of  my  Hutt,  they  made  me  a  Prefent  of  Venifon  and 
Fifh.  Next  day  they  convey'd  me  up  the  River,  to  the  place 
where  their  folks  were  hunting  the  Beavers.  The  ii/;&  we  im- 
barq'd,  and  landed  the  13/^  upon  the  fhoar  of  a  little  Lake, 
where  the  Head  of  that  Nation  refided.^  After  we  had  rear'd 
up  our  Hutts,  that  General  gave  me  a  Vifit,  and  inquir'd  which 
way  I  intended  to  move.  I  made  anfwer,  that  I  was  fo  far 
from  defigning  to  march  toward  the  N adouejfioiis  his  Enemies, 
that  I  fhould  not  come  near  'em  by  100  Leagues^;  and  to  con- 


^  The  "  Lake  of  Malhominis  "  was  probably  the  present  Grand  Lake  Butte  dea 
Morts,  where,  as  now,  grew  great  expanses  of  wild  rice  or  oats.  The  French  called 
the  Menominee  "  Folle  Avoines,"  the  name  for  this  plant  {Zizania  aquatica)  which 
formed  a  staple  food  for  Indians  in  the  Northwest.  See  Jenks,  "  Wild-rice  Gatherers 
of  the  Upper  Lakes,"  in  U.  S.  Bur.  of  Ethnol.  Report,  No.  19.  Father  Allouez 
mentioned  the  wild  rice  in  this  lake  on  his  journey  of  1670.  See  Jes.  Rel.,  liv,  pp. 
217-219,  307.  —  Ed. 

2  The  location  of  the  Outagami  or  Fox  Indian  villages  has  been  much  discussed. 
See  IVis.  Hist.  Colls.,  xvi,  p.  39.  The  most  that  can  be  said  is,  that  they  were 
probably  in  Waupaca  County,  on  Wolf  River,  or  some  of  its  affluents. 

The  Outagami  or  Fox  (Fr.,  Renard)  Indians  were  of  Algonquian  stock,  first 
encountered  in  Wisconsin,  which  was  their  permanent  home  until  driven  by  the 
French  across  the  Mississippi,  about  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century.  Their 
wars  upon  the  French  (1712-47)  undermined  the  empire  of  the  latter  in  the  Northwest. 
See  IVis.  Hist.  Colls.,  xvii.  In  1730  they  amalgamated  with  the  Sauk.  Remnants  of 
the  Sauk  and  Fox  tribes  are  still  extant  in  Iowa,  Nebraska,  and  Oklahoma.  —  Ed. 

'  Nadouessioux,  usually  abreviated  to  Sioux,  was  the  name  given  by  the  Algon- 
quian tribes  to  the  great  Western  stock,  who  called  themselves  Dakota.  The  term 
Nadouessioux  meant  ' '  snake-like  ones, "  or  "  enemy. ' '    At  this  time  they  were  hostile 


176  Some  New  Voyages 

firm  the  innocence  of  my  Intentions,  I  pray'd  him  to  fend  fix 
Warriours  to  accompany  me  to  the  long  River,  which  I  defign'd 
to  trace  up  to  its  Source.  He  reply'd  that  he  was  extream 
glad  to  find  that  I  carry'd  neither  Arms  nor  Cloaths  to  the 
Nadouejfious  ;  that  he  faw  I  had  not  the  equipage  of  a  Coureur 
de  Bois,  but  that  on  the  contrary,  I  had  fome  difcovery  in  my 
view.  At  the  fame  time  he  caution'd  me  not  to  venture  too 
far  up  that  Noble  River,  by  reafon  of  the  multitudes  of  People 
that  I  would  find  there,  though  they  have  no  fliomach  for  War  : 
He  mean'd,  that  fome  numerous  Party  might  furprife  me  in 
the  Night-time.  In  the  mean  time,  infliead  of  the  fix  War- 
riours that  I  defir'd,  he  gave  me  ten,  who  underftood  the 
Lingua,  and  knew  the  Country  of  the  Eokoros,  with  whom  his 
Nation  had  maintain'd  a  Peace  of  twenty  years  fl:anding.  I 
ftay'd  two  days  with  this  General,  during  which  time  he  regal'd 
me  nobly,  and  walk'd  about  with  me  to  give  me  the  Satisfac- 
tion of  obferving  the  difpofure  of  the  Cottages  of  the  Beaver- 
hunters  ;  a  defcription  of  which,  you  may  expe6l  in  another 
place ;  I  prefented  him  with  a  Fufee,  twelve  Flint-ftones,  two 
pound  of  Powder,  four  pound  of  Ball,  and  a  little  Axe,  and  I 
gave  each  of  his  two  Sons  a  [m]  great  Coat,  and  a  Roll  of 
Brafil  Tobacco.  Two  of  the  ten  Warriours  that  he  gave  me, 
could  fpeak  the  Language  of  the  Outaouas,  which  I  was  well 
pleas'd  with ;  not  that  I  was  a  fl:ranger  to  their  own  Language, 
for  between  that  and  the  Algonkin  there  is  no  great  difference, 


to  the  Fox,  but  in  their  eighteenth-century  wars  upon  the  French  were  their  allies. 
For  information  concerning  the  Siouan  people,  see  references  in  Hennepin,  Neiu 
Discovery,  p.  225,  note. — Ed. 


to  North- Kvntxicdi,  177 

but  in  regard  that  there  were  feveral  words  that  puzled  me. 
My  four  Outaouas  were  tranfported  with  this  little  Reinforce- 
ment, and  were  then  fo  incouraged,  that  they  told  me  above 
four  times,  that  we  might  venture  fafely  fo  far  as  the  Planta- 
tion of  the  Sun.  I  embarqed  with  this  fmall  Guard  the  i(>th 
about  Noon,  and  arriv'd  that  Night  at  the  Land-carriage  of 
Ouifconfinc,  which  we  finifh'd  in  two  days,  that  is,  we  left  the 
River  of  Puants,  and  tranfported  our  Canows  and  Baggage  to 
the  River  Ouifconfinc^  which  is  not  above  three  quarters  of  a 
League  diftant,  or  thereabouts.^  I  (hall  fay  nothing  of  the 
River  we  left,  but  that  'twas  Muddy,  full  of  Shelves,  and 
inclofed  with  a  fteep  Coaft,  Marfhes,  and  frightful  Rocks. 

The  \()th  we  embarqu'd  upon  the  River  Ouifconfinc^  and 
being  favour'd  by  a  flack  Current,  arriv'd  in  four  days  at  the 
place,  where  it  empties  it  felf  into  the  River  Mijfifipi^  which  is 
about  half  a  League  broad  in  that  part.  The  force  of  the 
Current,  and  the  breadth  of  that  River,  is  much  the  fame  as 
that  of  the  Loire.  It  lies  North-Eaft,  and  South- Weft  ;  and  its 
fides  are  adorn'd  with  Meadows,  lofty  Trees  and  Firs.  I  ob- 
ferv'd  but  two  Iflands  upon  it,  though  there  may  be  more. 


iLahontan  certainly  allows  too  little  time  for  the  passage  from  the  Outagami 
village  to  the  Fox-Wisconsin  portage  —  not  less  than  lOO  miles,  following  the  meander- 
ings  of  the  river. 

The  Fox-Wisconsin  portage  was  a  noted  place  in  the  early  history  of  Western 
discovery.  Apparently  Radisson  and  Groseilliers  were  (1655)  the  first  white  men  to 
traverse  it.  Marquette  describes  it  in  1672.  A  contemporary  writer  (1682)  says  it 
was  "  through  an  oak  grove  and  a  flooded  meadow." — JVis.  Hist.  Colls.,  xvi,  p.  106. 
The  portage  was  about  a  mile  in  length  ;  later,  the  French  built  a  corduroy  road 
through  the  swamp,  and  established  a  rude  wagon  carriage  for  tiieir  batteaux.  —IFis. 
Hist.  Colls. ,x,  pp.  221,  222.  A  government  ship  canal  now  spans  the  distance.  —  Ed. 
12 


178  Some  New  Voyages 

which  the  darknefs  of  the  Night  hid  from  us  as  we  came  down.^ 
The  23J  we  landed  upon  an  Ifland  in  the  River  Mijfifipi^  over 
againft  the  River  I  fpoke  of  but  now,  and  were  in  hopes  to 
find  fome  wild  Goats  there,  but  had  the  ill  fortune  to  find 
none.  The  day  after  we  croft  to  t'other  fide  of  the  River, 
founding  it  every  where,  as  we  had  done  the  day  before,  and 
found  nine  foot  water  in  the  fiialloweft  place.  The  [112]  2d 
of  November  we  made  the  Mouth  of  the  Long  River^  having 
firft  ftem'd  feveral  rapid  Currents  of  that  River,  though  'twas 
then  at  loweft  Ebb.  In  this  little  paffage  we  kill'd  feveral  wild 
Beeves  which  we  broil'd,  and  catch'd  feveral  large  Dabs.     On 


^The  distance  from  the  portage  to  the  mouth  of  the  Wisconsin  is  145  miles.  Its 
stage  of  water  was  in  Lahontan's  time  doubtless  much  higher  than  now,  although 
early  canoeists  speak  of  being  embarrassed  by  its  numerous  shifting  sand-bars.  Until 
the  depletion  of  the  great  pine  forests  in  north-central  Wisconsin,  it  was  an  important 
lumbering  stream.  From  the  time  of  the  erection  of  Wisconsin  Territory  (1836)  until 
about  1890  there  was  much  popular  agitation  in  favor  of  dredging  both  the  Fox  and 
Wisconsin,  in  order  to  connect  Lake  Michigan  with  Mississippi  River — in  other 
words,  adapting  what  was,  in  the  French  regime,  the  most  popular  fur-trade  route 
between  the  great  lakes  and  the  great  river,  to  the  requirements  of  modern  steam 
navigation.  Large  sums  of  money  have  been  spent  by  the  federal  government  in  sur- 
veys on  the  sprawling  and  sand-bar-ridden  Wisconsin,  and  in  a  lockage  system  on  the 
lower  Fox  ;  but  it  has  at  last  come  to  be  recognized  by  most  engineers  that  the  route 
is  impracticable  without  an  unwarranted  expenditure  of  public  funds.  The  Fox  as 
far  up  as  Lake  Winnebago  has  a  strong  current,  and  its  rapids  are  the  basis  of  the 
present  federal-built  water  powers  ;  the  upper  Fox  is  sluggish,  shallow,  and  frequently 
fringed  with  wild-rice  swamps.  There  is  to-day  occasional  navigation  by  flat-bottomed 
steamers  as  far  as  Berlin,  but  only  small  launches  can  proceed  to  the  portage.  On 
the  Wisconsin,  which  in  spring  and  autumn  overflows  to  the  width  of  a  mile  or  more, 
steam  craft  are  seldom  seen  ;  the  passage  of  a  small  launch,  perhaps  once  or  twice  a 
season,  arousing  general  curiosity.  Lahontan's  description,  although  brief,  is  not 
inexact,  and  appears  to  be  that  of  one  who  had  seen  the  alternating  cliffs  and  meadows 
which  border  the  Wisconsin,  one  of  the  most  beautiful  of  Western  streams.  See 
chapters  on  the  Fox- Wisconsin  waterway  in  Thwaites,  Donun  Historic  fVaterivays 
(Chicago,  newed.,  1903).  —  Ed. 


to  North' Amtnc2i,  179 

the  3^  we  enter'd  the  Mouth  of  the  Long  River,  which  looks 
like  a  Lake  full  of  Bull-rufhes  ;  we  found  in  the  middle  of  it  a 
narrow  Channel,  upon  which  we  fteer'd  till  Night,  and  then 
lay  by  to  fleep  in  our  Canows.  In  the  Morning  I  enquir'd  of 
my  ten  OuUigcimis,  if  we  had  far  to  fail  before  we  were  clear  of 
the  Rufhes,  and  receiv'd  this  anfwer,  that  they  had  never  been 
in  the  Mouth  of  that  River  before,  though  at  the  fame  time 
they  affur'd  me,  that  about  twenty  Leagues  higher,  the  Banks 
of  it  were  clad  with  Woods  and  Meadows.  But  after  all  we 
did  not  fail  fo  far,  for  about  ten  a  Clock  next  Morning  the 
River  came  pretty  narrow,  and  the  Shoar  was  cover'd  with 
lofty  Trees ;  and  after  continuing  our  courfe  the  reft  of  that 
day,  we  had  a  profpedl  of  Meadows  now  and  then.  That  fame 
Night  we  landed  at  a  point  of  Land,  with  a  defign  to  drefs 
our  broil'd  Meat,  for  at  that  time  we  had  none  freih.  The 
next  day  we  ftop'd  at  the  firft  Ifland  we  faw,  in  which  we  found 
neither  Man  nor  Beaft  ;  and  the  Evening  drawing  near,  I  was 
unwilling  to  venture  far  into  it,  fo  we  e'en  contented  our  felves 
with  the  catching  of  fome  forry  Fifh.  The  6th  a  gentle  Gale 
fprung  up,  which  wafted  us  to  another  Ifland  about  12  Leagues 
higher,  where  we  landed.  Our  pafTage  to  this  place  was  very 
quick,  notwithftanding  the  great  calm  that  always  prevails 
upon  this  River,  which  I  take  to  be  the  leaft  rapid  River  in 
the  World.  But  the  quicknefs  of  the  paffage  was  not  the  only 
furprifal,  for  I  was  amaz'd  that  I  faw  no  Harts,  nor  Bucks, 
nor  Turkeys,  having  met  with  'em  all  along  in  the  other  parts 
of  my  DIfcovery.  The  Jth  the  fame  Wind  drove  us  [113]  to 
a  third  Ifland,  that  lay  ten  or  twelve  Leagues  off  the  former, 


i8o  Some  New  Voyages 

which  we  quitted  in  the  Morning.  In  this  third  Ifland  our 
Savages  kill'd  thirty  or  forty  Pheafants,  which  I  was  not  ill 
pleas'd  with. 

The  8//?  the  Wind  proving  unferviceable  to  us,  by  reafon 
that  'twas  intercepted  by  Hills  cover'd  with  Firs,  we  ply'd 
our  Oars ;  and  about  two  in  the  Afternoon,  defcry'd  on  the 
left  Hand  large  Meadows,  and  fome  Hutts  at  the  diftance  of 
a  quarter  of  a  League  from  the  River.     Upon  this  Difcovery, 
our  Savages  and  ten  of  the  Soldiers  jump'd  upon  the  fhoar, 
and  direded  their  courfe  to  the  Houfes,  where  they  found  fifty 
or  fixty  Huntfmen  prepar'd  to  receive  'em,  with  their  Bows 
and  Arrows.     As  foon  as  the  Huntfmen  heard  the  voice  of 
the  Outagamis,  they  threw  down  their  Arms,  and  prefented 
the  Company  with  fome  Deer  that  they  had  juft  kill'd,  which 
they  likewife  help'd  to  carry  to  my  Canows.    The  Benefadors 
were  fome  of  the  Eokoros,  who  had  left  their  Villages,  and  come 
thither  to  hunt.     I  prefented  'em,  more  out  of  Policy,  than 
Acknowledgment,  with  Tobacco,  Knives  and  Needles,  which 
they  could  not  but  admire.    Upon  this,  they  repair'd  with  ex- 
pedition to  their  Villages,  and  gave  their  Affociates  to  under- 
ftand,  what  a  good  fort  of  People  they  had  met  with;  which 
had  fo  much  influence,  that  the  next  day  towards  the  Evening, 
there  appear'd  upon  the  River  fide  above  two  thoufand  Sav- 
ages, who  fell  a  dancing  as  foon  as  they  defcry'd  us.     There- 
upon, our  Outagamis  went  aflioar,  and  after  a  fhort  Conference, 
fome  of  the   principal  Savages  imbarqu'd  on  board  of  our 
Canows,  and  fo  we  all  flieer'd  to  the  chief  Village,  which  we 
did  not  reach  till  Midnight.    I  order'd  our  Hutts  to  be  made 


to  iVor^Z>- America.  i8i 

up  on  a  point  of  Land  near  a  little  River,  at  the  diftance  of  a 
quarter  of  a  League  from  the  Village.  Though  the  Savages 
prefs'd  me  extreamly  to  lodge  in  one  of  their  Villages,  yet 
none  [114]  went  with  'em  but  the  Outagamis,  and  the  four 
Outaoiias,  who  at  the  fame  time  caution'd  the  Savages  not  to 
approach  to  our  Camp  in  the  Night-time.  Next  day  I  allow'd 
my  Soldiers  to  refrefti  and  reft  themfelves ;  and  went  my  felf 
to  vifit  the  Grandees  of  this  Nation  to  whom  I  gave  Prefents 
of  Knives,  Ciffars,  Needles,  and  Tobacco.  They  gave  me  to 
underftand,  that  they  were  infinitely  well  pleas'd  with  our 
arrival  in  their  Country,  for  that  they  had  heard  the  Savages 
of  other  Nations  fpeak  very  honourably  of  the  French.  I  took 
leave  of  'em  on  the  12th,  and  fet  out  with  a  Convoy  of  five  or 
fix  hundred  Savages,  who  march'd  upon  the  fhoar,  keeping 
pace  with  our  Canows.  We  pafs'd  by  another  Village  that 
lay  to  the  right  Hand,  and  ftop'd  at  a  third  Village  that  was 
five  Leagues  diftant  from  the  firft,  but  did  not  difmibarque : 
For  all  that  I  defign'd,  was  to  make  a  Prefent  to  the  leading 
Men  of  the  Village,  from  whom  I  receiv'd  more  Indian  Corn, 
and  broil'd  or  dry'd  Meat,  than  I  had  occafion  for.  In  fine, 
I  pafs'd  from  Village  to  Village  without  flopping,  unlefs  it 
were  to  incamp  all  Night,  or  to  prefent  the  Savages  with  fome 
Trinkets ;  and  fo  fteer'd  on  to  the  laft  Village,  with  a  defign 
to  get  fome  Intelligence.  As  foon  as  we  arriv'd  at  the  end  of 
this  Village,  the  Great  Governour,  who  indeed  was  a  venerable 
old  Gentleman,  fent  out  Hunters  to  bring  us  good  Cheer. 
He  inform'd  me,  that  fixty  Leagues  higher  I  fhould  meet  with 
the  Nation  of  the  Effanapes,  who  wag'd  War  with  him  ;  that  if 


1 82  Some  New  Voyages 

it  had  not  been  for  their  being  at  War,  he  would  have  given 
me  a  Convoy  to  their  Country;  that,  however  he  mean'd  to 
give  up  to  me  fix  Slaves  of  that  Country,  which  I  might  carry 
home,  and  make  ufe  of  as  I  faw  occafion ;  and  that  in  failing 
up  the  River,  I  had  nothing  to  fear,  but  the  being  furpriz'd 
In  the  Night-time.  In  fine,  after  he  had  inftrudled  me  in 
feveral  very  ufeful  Circumftances,  I  immediately  [115]  made 
every  thing  ready  for  my  Departure. 

The  Commanders  of  this  People  acquainted  me,  that  they 
had  twelve  Villages  peopled  by  20000  Warriours ;  that  their 
number  was  much  greater  before  the  War,  which  they  wag'd 
at  one  time  with  the  Nadonejfis,  the  Panimoha,  and  the  EJfanapes. 
The  People  are  very  civil,  and  fo  far  from  a  wild  Savage  tem- 
per, that  they  have  an  Air  of  Humanity  and  Sweetnefs.  Their 
Hutts  are  long,  and  round  at  the  top,  not  unlike  thofe  of  our 
Savages ;  but  they  are  made  of  Reeds  and  Bulrufhes,  inter- 
lac'd  and  cemented  with  a  fort  of  fat  Earth.  Both  the  Men 
and  the  Women  go  naked  all  over,  excepting  their  Privities. 
The  Women  are  not  fo  handfom,  as  thofe  who  live  upon  the 
Lakes  of  Canada.  There  feems  to  be  fomething  of  Govern- 
ment and  Subordination  among  this  People ;  and  they  have 
their  Houfes  fortified  with  the  branches  of  Trees,  and  Faf- 
cines  fl:rengthen'd  with  fat  Earth. 

The  2ifl  we  imbarqu'd  at  the  break  of  day,  and  landed  that 
Night  in  an  Ifland  cover'd  with  Stones  and  Gravel,  having 
pafs'd  by  another  at  which  I  would  not  put  in,  becaufe  I  would 
not  flight  the  opportunity  of  the  Wind,  which  then  flood  very 
fair.     Next  day  the  Wind  flianding  equally  fair,  we  fet  out 


to  iVor^Z>- America.  183 

and  continued  our  courfe  all  that  Day,  and  the  following 
Night ;  for  the  fix  Effanapes  inform'd  us,  that  the  River  was 
clean,  and  free  from  Rocks  and  Beds  of  Sand.  The  23  we 
landed  early  in  the  Morning  on  the  right  fide  of  the  River,  in 
order  to  careen  one  of  our  Boats  that  fprung  a  Leak.  While 
that  was  a  doing,  we  dreft  feme  Venifon  that  had  been  pre- 
fented  me  by  the  Commander  of  the  laft  Village  of  the  Eokoros; 
and  the  adjacent  Country  being  replenifh'd  with  Woods,  the 
Savages  of  our  Company  went  a  fhooting  in  the  Forefts ;  but 
they  faw  nothing  but  fmall  Fowls,  that  they  did  not  think  fit 
to  fhoot  at.  As  foon  as  we  reimbarqu'd,  the  Wind  fell  all  of 
a  fudden,  and  fo  [116]  we  were  forc'd  to  ply  the  Oars;  but 
moft  of  the  Crew  having  flept  but  little  the  Night  before, 
they  row'd  but  very  faintly,  which  oblig'd  me  to  put  in  at  a 
great  Ifland  two  Leagues  higher ;  the  fix  Ejfanapes  Slaves  hav- 
ing inform'd  me,  that  this  Ifiand  afforded  great  plenty  of 
Hares,  which  I  found  to  be  true.  Thefe  Animals  had  a  lucky 
Inftindt  in  taking  fhelter  in  this  Ifland,  for  there  the  Woods 
are  fo  thick,  that  we  were  forc'd  to  fet  fire  to  feveral  places, 
before  we  could  diflodge  'em. 

Having  made  an  end  of  our  Game,  my  Soldiers  fed  heartily, 
and  thereupon  fell  fo  found  afleep,  that  I  could  fcarce  get  'em 
wak'd  upon  a  falfe  Alarm,  occafion'd  by  a  Herd  of  Wolves 
that  made  a  noife  among  the  Thickets  upon  the  Continent. 
We  reimbarqued  next  day  at  ten  a  Clock  in  the  Morning,  and 
did  not  run  above  twelve  Leagues  in  two  days,  by  reafon  that 
the  Savages  of  our  Company  would  needs  walk  along  the 
River  fide  with  their  Guns,  to  fhoot  Geefe  and  Ducks ;  in 


184  Some  New  Voyages 

which  they  had  very  good  Succefs.  After  that  we  incampt 
juft  by  the  Mouth  of  a  little  River  on  the  right  Hand,  and  the 
EJfanapes  Slaves  gave  me  notice,  that  the  firft  of  their  Villages 
was  not  above  fixteen  or  eighteen  Leagues  off.  Upon  this 
Information,  I  fent,  by  the  advice  of  the  Savages  of  our  Com- 
pany, two  of  the  Slaves  to  give  notice  of  our  arrival.  The 
26tb  we  row'd  briskly,  in  hopes  to  reach  the  firft  Village  that 
day ;  but  being  retarded  by  the  huge  quantities  of  floating 
Wood,  that  we  met  in  feveral  places,  we  were  forc'd  to  con- 
tinue all  Night  in  our  Canows.  The  2jth  about  ten  or  eleven 
a  Clock  we  approach'd  to  the  Village,  and  after  putting  up 
the  great  Calumet  of  Peace  upon  the  Prow  of  our  Canows, 
lay  upon  our  Oars. 

Upon  our  firft  appearance,  three  or  four  hundred  Ejjanapes 
came  running  to  the  fhoar,  and,  after  dancing  juft  over  againft 
us,  invited  us  afhoar.  As  foon  [117]  as  we  came  near  the 
fhoar,  they  began  to  jump  into  our  Canows  ;  but  I  gave  'em  to 
know  by  the  four  EJfanapes  Slaves,  that  I  defir'd  they  fhould 
retire,  which  they  did  immediately.  Then  I  landed,  being 
accompany'd  with  the  Savages  of  our  Company,  namely,  the 
Outagamis,  and  the  OutaouaSy  and  with  twenty  Soldiers.  At 
the  fame  time  I  gave  orders  to  my  Sergeants,  to  land  and  poft 
Centries.  As  we  ftood  upon  the  fhoar,  all  the  EJfanapes  prof- 
trated  themfelves  three  or  four  times  before  us,  with  their 
Hands  upon  their  Foreheads  ;  after  which  we  were  convoy'd 
to  the  Village  with  fuch  Acclamations  of  Joy,  as  perfectly 
ftun'd  us.  Upon  our  arrival  at  the  Gate,  our  Condudlors 
ftop'd  us,  till  the  Governour,  a  Man  of  fifty  years  of  Age, 


to  jYor^/'- America.  185 

march'd  out  with  five  or  fix  hundred  Men  arm'd  with  Bows 
and  Arrows.  The  Outagamis  of  my  Company  perceiving  this, 
charg'd  'em  with  Infolence  in  receiving  Strangers  with  their 
Arms  about  'em,  and  call'd  out  in  the  Eokoros  Language,  that 
they  ought  to  lay  down  their  Arms.  But  the  Effanapcs  Slaves 
that  I  had  fent  in  the  day  before,  came  up  to  me,  and  gave  me 
to  underftand,  that  'twas  their  cuftom  to  ftand  to  their  Arms 
on  fuch  occafions,  and  that  there  was  no  danger  in  the  cafe. 
However,  the  obftinate  Outagamis  oblig'd  us  to  retire  imme- 
diately to  our  Canows  :  Upon  which  the  Leading  Officer,  and 
the  whole  Battalion,  flung  their  Bows  and  Arrows  afide  all  on 
a  fudden.  Then  I  return'd,  and  our  whole  Company  enter'd 
the  Village  with  their  Fufees  in  their  Hands,  which  the  Sav- 
ages admir'd  mightily.  The  Leader  of  the  Savages  conducted 
us  to  a  great  Hutt,  which  look'd  as  if  no  body  had  liv'd  in 
it  before.  When  I  and  my  twenty  Soldiers  had  enter'd  the 
place,  they  ftop'd  the  Outagamis,  affirming,  that  they  did  not 
deferve  the  priviledge  of  entring  within  the  Cottage  of  Peace, 
fince  they  had  endeavour'd  to  create  a  difference,  and  occafion 
[118]  a  War  between  us  and  the  Ejjanapes.  In  the  mean  time 
I  order'd  my  Men  to  open  the  Door,  and  to  call  out  to  the 
Outagamis,  that  they  fhould  offer  no  manner  of  Injury :  But 
the  Outagamis  in  {lead  of  coming  in,  prefs'd  me  to  return  with 
all  expedition  to  the  Canows,  which  accordingly  I  did,  without 
lofs  of  time,  and  carry'd  with  me  the  four  Effanapes  Slaves,  in 
order  to  leave  'em  at  the  firft  Village  we  came  to.  We  had  no 
fooner  imbarqued,  than  the  two  other  Slaves  came  to  acquaint 
me  that  the  Governor  would  ftop  me  in  his  River ;  but  the 


1 86  Some  New  Voyages 

Outagamis  made  anfwer,  that  he  could  not  do  that,  without 
throwing  a  Mountain  into  it.  In  fine,  we  did  not  ftand  to  dif- 
pute  the  matter ;  and  tho'  'twas  then  late,  we  row'd  ftraight 
to  the  next  Village,  which  lay  about  three  Leagues  oflF.  During 
the  time  of  this  paffage,  I  us'd  the  precaution  of  taking  from 
my  fix  Slaves  an  exad  information  of  the  Conftitution  of  their 
Country,  and  particularly  of  the  principal  Village.  They 
having  affur'd  me,  that  the  Capital  Canton  was  feated  upon 
a  fort  of  a  Lake,  I  took  up  a  Refolution  of  not  fl:opping  at 
the  other  Villages,  where  I  fliould  only  lofe  time,  and  lavifh 
my  Tobacco,  and  fleering  diredtly  to  the  Metropolitan  in  order 
to  complain  to  their  Generaliflimo. 

We  arriv'd  at  the  Capital  Canton  on  the  3^  of  November^ 
and  there  met  with  a  very  honourable  Reception.  The  Outa- 
gamis of  our  Company  complain'd  of  the  affront  they  had 
receiv'd ;  but  the  Head  General  being  already  inform'd  of 
the  matter,  made  anfwer,  that  they  ought  to  have  carry'd  off 
the  Governour  or  Leading  Officer,  and  brought  him  along 
with  them.  In  paffing  from  the  firfl  Village  to  this  we  run 
fifty  Leagues,  and  were  follow'd  by  a  Proceffion  of  People, 
that  were  much  more  fociable  than  the  Governour  that  offer'd 
us  that  Affront.  After  our  Men  had  fitted  up  our  Hutts 
at  [119]  the  diftance  of  a  Cannon  fhot  from  the  Village;  we 
went  in  a  joynt  body  with  the  Outagamis  and  the  Outaouas^ 
to  the  Cacick  of  that  Nation ;  and  in  the  mean  time  the  Ejfa- 
napes  Slaves  were  brought  before  him  by  ten  of  my  Soldiers. 


^  According  to  Lahontan's  own  chronology  this  should  be  December,  not  Novem- 
ber.—Ed. 


to  iVor/Zy- America.  187 

1  was  adlually  in  the  prefence  of  this  petty  King,  when  thefe 
Slaves  fpent  half  an  hour  in  profbrating  themfelves  feveral 
times  before  him.  I  made  him  a  Prefent  of  Tobacco,  Knives, 
Needles,  Ciffars,  two  Firelocks  with  Flints,  fome  Hooks,  and 
a  very  pretty  Cutlas.  He  was  better  fatisfied  with  thefe  trifling 
things,  which  he  had  never  feen  before,  than  I  could  have  been 
with  a  plentiful  Fortune.  He  teflified  his  Acknowledgment 
of  the  Gift,  by  a  Counter-prefent  that  was  more  folid,  though 
not  much  more  valuable,  as  confifting  of  Peafe,  Beans,  Harts, 
Roe-bucks,  Geefe  and  Ducks,  of  which  he  fent  great  plenty 
to  our  Camp  :  And  indeed,  we  were  extreamly  well  fatisfied 
with  fuch  a  feafonable  Prefent.  He  gave  me  to  know.  That, 
fince  I  defign'd  to  vifit  the  Gnacfitares^  he  would  give  me  a 
Convoy  of  two  or  three  hundred  Men  :  That  the  Gnacfitares 
were  a  very  honeft  fort  of  People ;  and  that  both  they  and  his 
People  were  link'd  by  a  common  intereft  in  guarding  off  the 
Mozeemlek,  which  were  a  turbulent  and  warlike  Nation.  He 
added,  that  the  Nation  laft  mention'd  were  very  numerous; 
that  they  never  took  the  Field  without  twenty  thoufand  Men 
at  leaft:  That  to  repref  the  Incurfions  and  Infults  of  that 
dangerous  Enemy,  the  Gnacfitares  and  his  Nation  had  main- 
tain'd  a  Confederacy  for  fix  and  twenty  years ;  and  that  his 
Allies  (the  Gnacfitares)  were  forc'd  to  take  up  their  Habita- 
tion in  Iflands,  where  the  Enemy  cannot  reach  'em.  I  was 
glad  to  accept  of  his  Convoy,  and  return'd  him  many  thanks. 
I  ask'd  four  Pirogues  of  him,  which  he  granted  very  frankly, 
allowing  me  to  pick  and  choofe  that  number  out  of  fifty. 
Having  thus  concerted  my  Meafures,  I  [120]  was  refolv'd 


1 88  Some  New  Voyages 

to  lofe  no  time ;  and  with  that  view  order'd  my  Carpenters 
to  plane  the  Pirogues ;  by  which  they  were  thinner  and 
lighter  by  one  half.  The  poor  innocent  People  of  this  Coun- 
try, could  not  conceive  how  we  work'd  with  an  Axe  ;  every 
flroke  we  gave  they  cry'd  out,  as  if  they  had  feen  fome  new 
Prodigy ;  nay,  the  firing  of  Piftols  could  not  divert  'em  from 
that  Amazement,  though  they  were  equally  ftrangers  both 
to  the  Piftol  and  the  Axe.  As  foon  as  my  Pirogues  were 
got  ready,  I  left  my  Canows  with  the  Governour  or  Prince, 
and  beg'd  of  him  that  they  might  remain  untouch'd  by  any 
body ;  in  which  point  he  was  very  faithful  to  me. 

I  cannot  but  acquaint  you  in  this  place,  that  the  higher  I 
went  up  the  River,  I  met  with  more  difcretion  from  the  Sav- 
ages. But  in  the  mean  time  I  muft  not  take  leave  of  the  laft 
Village,  without  giving  fome  account  of  it.  'Tis  bigger  than 
all  the  reft,  and  is  the  Refidence  of  the  Great  Commander  or 
Generaliffimo,  whofe  Apartment  is  built  by  it  felf  towards  the 
fide  of  the  Lake,  and  furrounded  with  fifty  other  Apartments, 
in  which  all  his  Relations  are  lodg'd.  When  he  walks,  his  way 
is  ftrow'd  with  the  leaves  of  Trees :  But  commonly  he  is  carry'd 
by  fix  Slaves.  His  Royal  Robes  are  of  the  fame  Magnificence 
with  thofe  of  the  Commander  of  the  Okoros:  For  he  is  naked 
all  over,  excepting  his  lower  parts,  which  are  cover'd  with  a 
large  Scarf  made  of  the  barks  of  Trees.  The  large  extent  of 
this  Village  might  juftly  intitle  it  to  the  name  of  a  City.  The 
Houfes  are  built  almoft  like  Ovens,  but  they  are  large  and 
high ;  and  moft  of  'em  are  of  Reeds  cemented  with  fat  Earth. 
The  day  before  I  left  this  place,  as  I  was  walking  about,  1  faw 


to  7V<?r^i?- America.  189 

thirty  or  forty  Women  running  at  full  fpeed ;  and  being  fur- 
pris'd  with  the  fpe6tacle,  fpoke  to  the  Outagamis  to  order  my 
four  Slaves  to  fee  what  the  matter  was ;  for  thefe  Slaves  were 
my  only  Interpreters  in  [121]  this  unknown  Country.  Ac- 
cordingly they  brought  me  word,  that  'twas  fome  new  mar- 
ried Women,  who  were  running  to  receive  the  Soul  of  an  old 
Fellow  that  lay  a  dying.  From  thence  I  concluded,  that  the 
People  were  Pythagoreans ;  and  upon  that  Apprehenfion,  ask'd 
'em  how  they  came  to  eat  Animals,  into  which  their  Souls 
might  be  transfus'd :  But  they  made  anfwer,  that  the  Tranf- 
migration  of  Souls  is  always  confin'd  to  the  refpedive  Species, 
fo  that  the  Soul  of  a  Man  cannot  enter  into  a  Fowl,  as  that 
of  a  Fowl  cannot  be  lodg'd  in  a  quadruped,  and  fo  on.  The 
Okoros,  of  both  Sexes,  are  fully  as  handfom  and  as  clever,  as 
this  People. 

December  the  ^th,  I  took  leave  of  this  Village,  having  ten 
Soldiers  on  board  of  my  Pirogue,  befides  the  ten  Oumatnis,^ 
the  four  Outaouas^  and  the  four  Ejfanapes  Slaves,  that  I  have 
mention'd  fo  often.  Here  ended  the  Credit  and  Authority 
of  the  Calumet  of  Peace,  for  the  Gnacfitares  are  not  acquainted 
with  that  Symbol  of  Concord.  The  firft  day  we  had  enough 
to  do  to  run  fix  or  feven  Leagues,  by  reafon  of  the  Bulrufhes 
with  which  the  Lake  is  incumber'd.  The  two  following  days 
we  fail'd  twenty  Leagues.  The  ^th  day  a  Weft-North-Weft 
wind  furpris'd  us  with  fuch  a  boiflerous  violence,  that  we  were 
forc'd  to  put  afhoar,  and  lay  two  days  upon  a  fandy  Ground, 


^  This  must  be  a  misprint  for  Outagamis,  as  no  previous  mention  has  been  made 
ofOumanis  (Miamis)  accompanying  him.  —  Ed. 


190  Some  New  Voyages 

where  we  were  In  danger  of  ftarving  for  Hunger  and  Cold; 
for  the  Country  was  fo  barren,  that  we  could  not  find  a  chip 
of  Wood  wherewith  to  warm  our  felves,  or  to  drefs  our 
Victuals  ;  and  as  far  as  our  Eye  could  reach,  there  was  nothing 
to  be  feen  but  Fens  cover'd  with  Reeds  and  Clay,  and  naked 
Fields.  Having  indur'd  this  Hardfhip  we  fet  out  again,  and 
row'd  to  a  little  Ifland,  upon  which  we  incamp'd,  but  found 
nothing  there  but  green  Fields ;  however,  to  make  fome 
amends  we  fifh'd  up  great  numbers  of  little  Trouts,  upon 
which  we  fed  very  heartily.  At  laft,  after  [122]  failing  fix  days 
more,  we  arriv'd  at  the  Point  or  Lands-end  of  that  Ifland 
which  you  fee  mark'd  in  my  Map  with  a  Flower-de-luce.  'Twas 
then  the  19th  day  of  December,  and  we  had  not  yet  felt  all 
the  rigorous  Hardfhips  of  the  Cold.  As  foon  as  I  had  landed 
and  fitted  up  my  Tents  or  Hutts,  I  detach'd  my  Ejfanapes 
Slaves  to  the  firft  of  the  three  Villages  that  lay  before  us ;  for 
I  had  avoided  flopping  at  fome  Villages  in  an  Ifland  upon 
which  we  coafted  in  the  Night-time.  The  Slaves  return'd  in 
a  great  Alarm,  occafion'd  by  the  unfavourable  Anfv/er  they 
receiv'd  from  the  Griacfitares,  who  took  us  for  Spaniards,  and 
were  angry  with  them  for  condu6ling  us  to  their  Country.  I 
fhall  not  be  minute  in  every  Particular  that  happen'd,  for  fear 
of  tyring  your  Patience.  'Tis  fufficient  to  acquaint  you,  that 
upon  the  Report  of  my  Slaves  I  immediately  embark'd,  and 
pofted  my  felf  in  another  Ifland  that  lay  in  the  middle  between 
the  great  Ifland  and  the  Continent ;  but  I  did  not  fufTer  the 
Effanapes  to  be  in  my  Camp.  In  the  mean  time  the  Gnacfitares 
fent   expeditious    Couriers   to    the    People    that    live   eighty 


to  iVor^/6-America.  191 

Leagues  to  the  Southward  of  them,  to  defire  they  would  fend 
fome  of  their  number  to  examine  us  ;  for  that  People  were 
fuppos'd  to  be  well  acquainted  with  the  Spaniards  of  New 
Mexico.  The  length  of  the  Journey  did  not  difcourage  'em, 
for  they  came  as  chearfully  as  if  it  had  been  upon  a  National 
Concern  :  and  after  taking  a  view  of  our  Cloaths,  our  Swords, 
our  Fufees,  our  Air,  Complexion,  and  manner  of  Speech,  were 
forc'd  to  own  that  we  were  not  true  Spaniards?  Thefe  Con- 
fiderations,  join'd  to  the  Account  I  gave  'em  of  the  Reafons 
upon  which  I  undertook  the  Voyage,  of  the  War  we  were 
ingag'd  in  againft  Spain,  and  of  the  Country  to  the  Eaftward 
that  we  poffefs'd  ;  thefe,  I  fay,  had  fo  much  influence,  as  to 
undeceive  'em.  Then  they  invited  me  to  encamp  in  their 
Ifland,  and  brought  me  a  fort  of  [123]  Grain  not  unlike  our 
Lentils,  that  grows  plentifully  in  that  Country.  I  thank'd  'em 
for  their  Invitation,  and  told  'em  that  I  would  not  be  oblig'd 
to  diftruft  them,  nor  give  them  any  occafion  to  diftrufl:  me. 
However,  I  crofs'd  with  my  Savages  and  ten  Soldiers  well 
arm'd;  and  after  breaking  the  Ice  in  certain  places  (for  it  had 
freez'd  hard  for  ten  or  twelve  days)  I  landed  within  two 
Leagues  of  one  of  their  Villages,  to  which  I  walk'd  up  by 
Land.  'Tis  needlefs  to  mention  the  Particulars  of  the  Cere- 
mony with  which  I  was  receiv'd,  it  being  the  fame  with  what 
I  defcrib'd  upon  other  occafions ;  I  fhall  only  take  occafion  to 
acquaint  you,  that  my  Prefents  made  a  wonderful  Imprefiion 
upon  the  Minds  of  thefe  People,  whom  I  fhall  call  a  rafcally 
Rabble,  tho'  at  the  fame  time  they  are  the  politefl  Nation  I 
have  yet  feen  in  this  Country.     Their  Governour  bears  the 


192  Some  New  Voyages 

Figure  of  a  King  more  than  any  of  the  other  Commanders  of 
the  Savages.  He  has  an  abfolute  Dominion  over  all  the  Vil- 
lages which  are  defcrib'd  in  my  Map.  In  this  and  the  other 
Iflands  I  faw  large  Parks,  or  Inclofures,  ftock'd  with  wild 
Beeves  for  the  ufe  of  the  People.  I  had  an  Interview  for  two 
hours  together  with  the  Governour,  or  the  Cacick;  and  almoft 
our  whole  Conference  related  to  the  Spaniards  of  New  Mexico, 
who,  as  he  affured  me,  were  not  diftant  from  his  Country 
above  eighty  Tazous,  each  of  which  is  three  Leagues.  I  muft 
own  indeed,  I  was  as  curious  upon  this  Head  as  he  was ;  and 
I  wanted  an  Account  of  the  Spaniards  from  him,  as  much  as 
he  did  from  me:  In  fine,  we  reciprocally  inform'd  one  another 
of  a  great  many  Particulars  relating  to  that  Head.  He 
requefted  me  to  accept  of  a  great  Houfe  that  was  prepar'd 
for  me ;  and  his  firft:  piece  of  Civility  confifted  in  calling  in  a 
great  many  Girls,  and  preffing  me  and  my  Retinue  to  ferve 
our  felves.  Had  this  Temptation  been  thrown  in  our  way  at 
a  more  feafonable  time,  it  had  prov'd  irrefiftible ;  but  'twas 
not  an  agreeable  Mefs  [124]  for  Paffengers  that  were  infee- 
bled  by  Labour  and  Want.  Sine  Cerere  Cs?  Baccho  friget  Venus. 
After  he  made  us  fuch  a  civil  Proffer,  the  Savages,  upon  my 
inftance,  reprefented  to  him,  that  my  Detachment  expeded 
me  at  a  certain  hour,  and  that  if  I  ftay'd  longer,  they  would 
be  in  pain  for  me.  This  Adventure  happen'd  on  the  7th  of 
January. 

Two  days  after,  the  Cacick  came  to  fee  me,  and  brought 
with  him  four  hundred  of  his  own  Subjeds,  and  iour  Mozeem- 
lek  Savages,  whom  I  took  for  Spaniards.     My  Miftake  was 


to  North' Kn'\Qnc2i.  193 

occafion'd  by  the  great  difference  between  thefe  two  American 
Nations ;  for,  the  Mozeemlek  Savages  were  cloath'd,  they  had 
a  thick  biifliy  Beard,  and  their  Hair  hung  down  under  their 
Ears ;  their  Complexion  was  fwarthy,  their  Addrefs  was  civil 
and  fubmifTive,  their  Meen  grave,  and  their  Carriage  engag- 
ing. Upon  thefe  Confiderations  I  could  not  imagine  that 
they  were  Savages,  tho'  after  all  I  found  my  felf  miftaken. 
Thefe  four  Slaves  gave  me  a  Defcription  of  their  Country, 
which  the  Gnacfitares  reprefented  by  way  of  a  Map  upon  a 
Deer's  Skin ;  as  you  fee  it  drawn  in  this  Map.  Their  Villages 
ftand  upon  a  River  that  fprings  out  of  a  ridge  of  Mountains, 
from  which  the  Long  River  likewife  derives  its  Source,  there 
being  a  great  many  Brooks  there  which  by  a  joint  Con- 
fluence form  the  River.  When  the  Gnacfitares  have  a  mind  to 
hunt  wild  Beeves,  they  fet  out  in  Pirogues,  which  they  make 
ufe  of  till  they  come  to  the  Crofs  mark'd  thus  (+)  in  the 
Map,  at  the  Confluence  of  two  little  Rivers.  The  Hunting 
of  the  wild  Bulls,  with  which  all  the  Valleys  are  cover'd  in 
Summer,  is  fometimes  the  occafion  of  a  cruel  War :  For  the 
other  Crofs  (+)  which  you  fee  in  the  Map  is  one  of  the 
Boundaries  or  Limits  of  Mozeemlek;  and  if  either  of  thefe 
two  Nations  advances  but  a  little  beyond  their  Limits,  it  gives 
Rife  to  a  bloody  Engagement.  The  Mountains  I  fpoke  of  but 
now,  are  fix  Leagues  broad,  and  fo  high  [125]  that  one  muft 
cafl:  an  infinity  of  Windings  and  Turnings  before  he  can  crofs 
'em.     Bears  and  wild  Beafl:s  are  their  only  Inhabitants. 

The  Mozeemleck  Nation  is  numerous  and  puifl"ant.     The 

four  Slaves  of  that  Country  inform'd  me,  that  at  the  difliance 
la 


194  Some  New  Voyages 

of  150  Leagues  from  the  Place  where  I  then  was,  their  prin- 
cipal River  empties  it  felf  into  a  Salt  Lake  of  three  hundred 
Leagues  in  Circumference,  the  mouth  of  which  is  about  two 
Leagues  broad:  That  the  lower  part  of  that  River  is  adorn'd 
with  fix  noble  Cities,  furrounded  with  Stone  cemented  with 
fat  Earth :  That  the  Houfes  of  thefe  Cities  have  no  Roofs, 
but  are  open  above  like  a  Platform,  as  you  fee  'em  drawn  in 
the  Map  :  That  befides  the  abovemention'd  Cities,  there  were 
above  an  hundred  Towns,  great  and  fmall,  round  that  fort  of 
Sea,  upon  which  they  navigate  with  fuch  Boats  as  you  fee 
drawn  in  the  Map  :  That  the  People  of  that  Country  made 
Stuffs,  Copper  Axes,  and  feveral  other  Manufactures,  which 
the  Outagamis  and  my  other  Interpreters  could  not  give  me 
to  underftand,  as  being  altogether  unacquainted  with  fuch 
things :  That  their  Government  was  Defpotick,  and  lodg'd 
in  the  hands  of  one  great  Head,  to  whom  the  reft  paid  a 
trembling  Submiffion:  That  the  People  upon  that  Lake  call 
themfelves  Tahuglauk^  and  are  as  numerous  as  the  Leaves  of 
Trees,  (fuch  is  the  Expreffion  that  the  Savages  ufe  for  an 
Hyperbole:)  That  the  Mozeemlek  People  fupply  the  Cities 
or  Towns  of  the  Tahuglauk  with  great  numbers  of  little  Calves, 
which  they  take  upon  the  abovemention'd  Mountains :  and, 
That  the  Tahuglauk  make  ufe  of  thefe  Calves  for  feveral  ends ; 
for,  they  not  only  eat  their  Flefh,  but  bring  'em  up  to  Labour, 
and  make  Cloaths,  Boots,  ^c.  of  their  Skins.  They  added, 
That  'twas  their  Misfortune  to  be  took  Prifoners  by  the 
Gnacfttares  in  the  War  which  had  lafted  for  eighteen  Years ; 
but,  that  they  hoped  a  Peace  would  be  fpeedily  concluded, 


to  iVd?;YZ>- America.  195 

[126]  upon  which  the  Prifoners  would  be  exchang'd,  purfuant 
to  the  ufual  Cuftom.  They  glory'd  in  the  poffeffion  of  a 
greater  meafure  of  Reafon  than  the  Gnacfitares  could  pretend 
to,  to  whom  they  allow  no  more  than  the  Figure  of  a  Man ; 
for  they  look  upon  'em  as  Beafts  otherwife.  To  my  mind, 
their  Notion  upon  this  Head  is  not  fo  very  extravagant ;  for 
I  obferv'd  fo  much  Honour  and  Politenefs  in  the  Converfa- 
tion  of  thefe  four  Slaves,  that  I  thought  I  had  to  do  with 
Europeans :  But,  after  all,  I  muft  confefs,  that  the  Gnacfitares 
are  the  moil  tradlable  Nation  I  met  with  among  all  the  Sav- 
ages. One  of  the  four  Mozeemiek  Slaves  had  a  reddifh  fort  of 
a  Copper  Medal  hanging  upon  his  Neck,  the  Figure  of  which 
is  reprefented  in  the  Map.  I  had  it  melted  by  Mr.  de  TontVs 
Gun-fmith,  who  underftood  fomething  of  Mettals ;  but  it 
became  thereupon  heavier,  and  deeper  colour'd,  and  withal 
fomewhat  tra6lable.  I  defir'd  the  Slaves  to  give  me  a  circum- 
ftantial  Account  of  thefe  Medals ;  and  accordingly  they  gave 
me  to  underftand,  that  they  are  made  by  the  Tahuglauk,  who 
are  excellent  Artizans,  and  put  a  great  value  upon  fuch  Med- 
als. I  could  pump  nothing  farther  out  of  'em,  with  relation 
to  the  Country,  Commerce  and  Cuftoms  of  that  remote  Nation. 
All  they  could  fay  was,  that  the  great  River  of  that  Nation 
runs  all  along  Weftward,  and  that  the  fait  Lake  into  which  it 
falls  is  three  hundred  Leagues  in  Circumference,  and  thirty 
in  breadth,  its  Mouth  ftretching  a  great  way  to  the  South- 
ward. I  would  fain  have  fatisfied  my  Curiofity  in  being  an 
eye-witnefs  of  the  Manners  and  Cuftoms  of  the  Tahuglauk; 
but  that  being  impradlicable,  I  was  forc'd  to  be  inftrudled  at 


196  Some  New  Voyages 

fecond  hand  by  thefe  Mozeemlek  Slaves  ;  who  affur'd  me,  upon 
the  Faith  of  a  Savage,  that  the  Tahuglauk  wear  their  Beards 
two  Fingers  breadth  long ;  that  their  Garments  reach  down 
to  their  Knees ;  that  they  cover  their  Heads  with  a  (harp- 
pointed  Cap;  that  they  [127]  always  wear  a  long  Stick  or 
Cane  in  their  hands,  which  is  tipp'd,  not  unlike  what  we  ufe 
in  Europe ;  that  they  wear  a  fort  of  Boots  upon  their  Legs 
which  reach  up  to  the  Knee  ;  that  their  Women  never  fhew 
themfelves,  which  perhaps  proceeds  from  the  fame  Principle 
that  prevails  in  Italy  and  Spain  ;  and,  in  fine,  that  this  People 
are  always  at  War  with  the  puiffant  Nations  that  are  feated  in 
the  Neighbourhood  of  the  Lake ;  but  withal,  that  they  never 
difquiet  the  ftrowling  Nations  that  fall  in  their  way,  by  reafon 
of  their  Weaknefs :  An  admirable  Leffon  for  fome  Princes  in 
the  World,  who  are  fo  much  intent  upon  the  making  ufe  of 
the  ftrongeft  hand. 

This  was  ail  I  could  gather  upon  that  Subjedl.  My  Curi- 
ofity  prompted  me  to  defire  a  more  particular  Account ;  but 
unluckily  I  wanted  a  good  Interpreter :  and  having  to  do 
with  feveral  Perfons  that  did  not  well  underftand  themfelves, 
I  could  make  nothing  of  their  incoherent  Fuftian.  I  prefented 
the  poor  miferable  Slaves  with  fomething  in  proportion  to 
the  Cuftom  of  that  Country,  and  endeavour'd  to  perfwade 
'em  to  go  with  me  to  Canada^  by  making  'em  fuch  Offers  as 
in  their  efteem  would  appear  like  Mountains  of  Gold  :  but 
the  love  they  had  for  their  Country  ftifled  all  Perfwafion ;  fo 
true  it  is,  that  Nature  reduc'd  to  its  juft  Limits  cares  but  little 
for  Riches. 


to  North- Avnmc3..  197 

In  the  mean  time  it  began  to  thaw,  and  the  Wind  chop'd 
about  to  the  South-weft ;  upon  which  I  gave  notice  to  the 
great  Cacique  of  the  Gnacjitares,  that  I  had  a  mind  to  return  to 
Canada.  Upon  that  occafion  I  repeated  my  Prefents;  in  com- 
penfation  of  which,  my  Pirogues  were  ftow'd  with  Beef  as  full 
as  they  could  hold.  This  done,  I  embark'd,  and  crofs'd  over 
from  the  little  Ifland  to  the  Continent,  where  I  fix'd  a  great 
long  Pole,  with  the  Arms  of  France  done  upon  a  Plate  of 
Lead.  I  fet  out  the  26th  of  January^  and  arriv'd  fafe  on  the 
5th  of  February  in  the  Country  [128]  of  the  Effanapes.  We 
had  much  more  pleafure  in  faihng  down  the  River,  than  we 
had  in  going  up  ;  for  we  had  the  agreeable  diverfion  of  feeing 
feveral  Huntfmen  fhooting  the  Water-Fowl,  that  are  plentiful 
upon  that  River.  You  muft  know,  that  the  Stream  of  the 
Long  River  is  all  along  very  flack  and  eafie,  abating  for  about 
three  Leagues  between  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  Village; 
for  there  indeed  its  Current  may  be  call'd  rapid.  The  Chan- 
nel is  fo  ftraight,  that  it  fcarce  winds  at  all  from  the  Head  to 
the  Lake.  'Tis  true  'tis  not  very  pleafant ;  for  moft  of  its 
Banks  have  a  difmal  Profpedl,  and  the  Water  it  felf  has  an 
ugly  Tafte :  but  then  its  Ufefulnefs  attones  for  fuch  Incon- 
veniencies ;  for,  'tis  navigable  with  the  greateft  eafe,  and  will 
bear  Barques  of  fifty  Tun,  till  you  come  to  that  place  which 
is  mark'd  with  a  Flower-de-luce  in  the  Map,  and  where  I  put 
up  the  Poft  that  my  Soldiers  chriften'd  la  Hontau's  Limit. 
March  1.  I  arriv'd  in  the  Mijfifipi^  which  was  then  much 
deeper  and  more  rapid  than  before,  by  reafon  of  the  Rains 
and  Land-floods.     To  fave  the  Labour  of  Rowing,  we  then 


198  Some  New  Voyages 

left  our  Boats  to  the  Current,  and  arriv'd  on  the  loth  in  the 
Ifland  of  Rencontres^  which  took  its  Name  from  the  Defeat  of 
400  Iroquefe,  accompHfh'd  there  by  300  NadoueJJis.  The  Story 
of  the  Encounter  is  briefly  this  :  A  Party  of  400  Iroquefe  hav- 
ing a  mind  to  furprife  a  certain  People  in  the  Neighbourhood 
of  the  Otentas  (of  whom  more  anon)  march'd  to  the  Country 
of  the  Illinefe,  where  they  built  Canows,  and  were  furnifh'd 
with  Provifions.  After  that  they  embark'd  upon  the  River 
MiJJifipi,  and  were  difcover'd  by  another  little  Fleet  that  was 
failing  down  the  other  fide  of  the  fame  River.  The  Iroquefe 
crofs'd  over  immediately  to  that  Ifland,  which  is  fince  call'd 
/iux  Rencontres.  The  Nadouefjis,  i.  e.  the  other  little  Fleet, 
being  fufpicious  of  fome  ill  Defign,  without  knowing  what 
People  they  were,  (for  they  had  no  knowledge  of  the  [129] 
Iroquefe  but  by  Hear-fay ;  upon  this  fufpicion,  I  fay,  they 
tugg'd  hard  to  come  up  with  'em.  The  two  Armies  pofl:ed 
themfelves  upon  the  point  of  the  Ifland,  where  the  two  Croffes 
are  put  down  in  the  Map  ;  and  as  foon  as  the  Nadoueffis  came 
in  fight,  the  Iroquefe  cry'd  out  in  the  lUinefe  Language,  Who 
are  ye?  To  which  the  Nadoueffis  anfwer'd.  Some  body :  And  put- 
ting the  like  Queflion  to  the  Iroquefe^  receiv'd  the  fame  An- 
fwer.  Then  the  Iroquefe  put  this  Queftion  to  'em.  Where  are 
you  a  going?  To  hunt  Beeves,  reply'd  the  Nadoueffis.  But  pray ., 
fays  the  Nadoueffis,  what's  your  bufinefs?  To  hunt  Men,  reply'd 
the  Iroquefe.  ^Tis  well,  fays  the  Nadoueffis,  we  are  men,  and  fo 
you  need  go  no  farther.  Upon  this  Challenge  the  two  Parties 
difembark'd,  and  the  Leader  of  the  Nadoueffis  cut  his  Canows 


-1 


to  North-Kvnmc2i.  199 

to  pieces  ;  and  after  reprefenting  to  his  Warriours  that  they 
behov'd  either  to  Conquer  or  Die,  march'd  up  to  the  Iroquefe; 
who  receiv'd  'em  at  firft  Onfet  with  a  Cloud  of  Arrows :  But 
the  Nadouejfui  having  ftood  their  firft  Difcharge,  which  kill'd 
'em  eighty  Men,  fell  in  upon  'em  with  their  Clubs  in  their 
hands,  before  the  others  could  charge  again ;  and  fo  routed 
'em  entirely.  This  Engagement  lafted  for  two  hours,  and 
was  fo  hot,  that  two  hundred  and  fixty  Iroquefe  fell  upon  the 
fpot,  and  the  reft  were  all  taken  Prifoners.  Some  of  the 
Iroquefe  indeed  attempted  to  make  their  Efcape  after  the 
Adion  was  over ;  but  the  victorious  General  fent  ten  or 
twelve  of  his  Men  to  purfue  'em  in  one  of  the  Canows  that 
he  had  taken :  and  accordingly  they  were  all  overtaken  and 
drown'd.  The  Nadoueffis  having  obtain'd  this  Vidory,  cut 
off  the  Nofes  and  Ears  of  two  of  the  clivereft  Prifoners ;  and 
fupplying  'em  with  Fufees,  Powder,  and  Ball,  gave  'em  the 
liberty  of  returning  to  their  own  Country,  in  order  to  give 
their  Country-men  to  underftand,  that  they  ought  not  to 
employ  Women  to  hunt  after  Men  any  longer.^ 

[130]  The  1 2th  we  arriv'd  at  the  Village  of  the  Otentas^ 
where  we  took  in  a  plentiful  Provifion  of  Turkey  Corn,  of  which 
thefe  People  have  great  ftore.  They  inform'd  us,  that  their 
River  was  pretty  rapid,  and  took  its  Rife  from  the  neighbour- 
ing Mountains ;  and  that  the  upper  part  of  it  was  adorn'd 
with  feveral  Villages  inhabited  by  the  People  call'd  Pnnimaha, 


^  This  tale  appears  to  have  been  an  invention  of  Lahontan ;  none  of  his  contem- 
poraries describes  any  such  encounter  between  the  Sioux  and  the  Iroquois.  —  Ed. 


200  Some  New  Voyages 

Paneaffa,  and  Panetonka}  But  confidering  that  I  was  ftraitned 
for  time,  and  that  I  faw  no  probability  of  learning  what  I 
wanted  to  know  with  reference  to  the  Spaniards^  I  took  leave 
of  'em  the  next  day,  which  was  the  13th,  and  in  four  days 
time,  by  the  help  of  the  Current  and  our  Oars,  made  the 
River  of  the  Miffouris?  This  done,  we  run  up  againft  the 
Stream  of  that  River,  which  was  at  leaft  as  rapid  as  the  Mijfifipi 
was  at  that  time;  and  arriv'd  on  the  i8th  at  the  firft  Village 
of  the  Miffouris,  where  I  only  ftop'd  to  make  the  People  fome 
Prefents  that  procur'd  me  a  hundred  Turkeys,  with  which 
that  People  are  wonderfully  well  ftock'd.^  After  that,  we 
row'd  hard  againft  the  Stream,  and  landed  next  night  near  the 
fecond  Village.  As  foon  as  I  arriv'd,  I  detach'd  a  Sergeant 
with  ten  Soldiers  to  convoy  the  Outagamis  to  the  Village, 
while  the   reft  of  my   Crew  were   bufied   in   fitting   up    our 

1  River  Otentas  is  an  early  name  for  the  Des  Moines,  so  called  from  the  tribe 
encountered  near  its  mouth.  Marquette's  map  shows  the  Otontantas,  whom  Shea, 
Early  Voyages  on  the  Mississippi  (Albany,  1861),  identifies  with  the  Oto,  evidently 
the  same  as  the  Authoutantas  of  LeClercq  and  Hennepin.  The  Oto  were  a  Siouan 
tribe  who  by  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century  had  migrated  west  of  the  Mis- 
souri, and  were  settled  on  Platte  River  with  the  remnant  of  the  Missouri  tribe.  The 
Panimaha,  Paneassa,  and  Panitonka  were  divisions  of  the  Pawnees,  of  Caddoan  stock. 
The  Panimaha  were  later  called  Pawnee  Loups.  By  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  cen- 
tury they  were  all  west  of  the  Missouri.  —  Ed. 

2  Missouri  River  was  first  seen  at  its  mouth  by  Jolliet  and  Marquette,  who  called 
it  Pekitanoui,  meaning  Muddy  Stream.  Marquette  surmised  that  its  upper  waters 
might  mingle  with  a  stream  flowing  into  the  Vermillion  Sea  {Pacific  Ocean). —  Ed. 

3  The  Missouri  were  a  Siouan  tribe  first  encountered  near  the  mouth  of  their  great 
river.  It  would  be  fruitless  to  attempt  to  locate  the  villages  described  by  Lahontan  ; 
but  later,  the  Missouri  dwelt  for  many  years  near  the  mouth  of  Grand  River.  From 
this  site  they  were  driven  late  in  the  eighteenth  century,  and  amalgamated  with  the 
Kansa  and  Oto.  On  the  movements  of  all  these  tribes  see  Dorsey,  "  Migrations  of 
Siouan  Tribes,"  in  Amer.  Naturalist,  xx,  pp.  211-218.  —  Ed. 


to  iV(?r^^- America.  201 

Hutts  and  unloading  our  Canows.  It  happen'd  unluckily 
that  neither  the  Soldiers  nor  the  Outagamis  could  make  the 
Savages  underftand  'em ;  and  the  latter  were  juft  ready  to  fall 
upon  'em,  when  an  old  Fellow  cry'd  out,  that  the  Strangers 
were  not  without  more  company,  for  that  he  had  difcover'd 
our  Huts  and  Canows.  Upon  this,  the  Soldiers  and  the  Outa- 
gamis retlr'd  In  a  great  Confternation,  and  advls'd  me  to  keep 
a  ftrong  Guard  all  night.  About  two  a  clock  in  the  Morning 
two  Men  approach'd  to  our  little  Camp,  and  call'd  in  Illinefe, 
that  they  wanted  an  Interview ;  upon  which  the  Outagamis^ 
being  extreamly  well  fatisfied  that  there  was  fome  body  among 
'em  who  could  underftand  what  they  faid,  reply'd  [131]  In 
lUinefe,  that  they  fliould  be  very  welcome  as  foon  as  the  Sun 
appear'd  in  the  Horizon.  Neverthelefs,  the  Outagamis  re- 
fented  the  former  Affront  fo  much,  that  they  importun'd  me 
all  night  long  to  fet  fire  to  the  Village,  and  put  all  the  fcoun- 
drel  Inhabitants  to  the  Sword.  I  made  anfwer  to  'em,  that 
'twas  our  bufinefs  to  be  wifer  than  they,  and  to  bend  our 
Thoughts,  not  upon  a  frultlefs  Revenge,  but  upon  the  Dlfcov- 
ery  that  we  were  then  in  queft  of.  At  the  break  of  Day  the 
two  Adventurers  of  the  Night  came  up  to  us,  and  after  put- 
ting Interrogatories  to  us  for  the  fpace  of  two  hours,  invited 
us  to  come  up  to  their  Village.  The  Outagamis  reply'd,  that 
the  Head  or  Governour  of  their  Nation  ought  to  have  faluted 
us  fooner:  and  this  oblig'd  'em  to  go  back  to  give  him  notice. 
After  that  we  faw  no  body  for  three  hours :  but  at  laft,  when 
our  Impatience  was  juft  beginning  to  boil,  we  perceiv'd  the 
Governour,  who  accofted  us  in  a  trembling  Pofture.     He  was 


202  Some  New  Voyages 

accompany'd  with  fome  of  his  own  Men,  who  were  loaded 
with  broil'd  or  dry'd  Meat,  Sacks  of  Turkey  or  Indian  Corn, 
dry'd  Raifins,  and  fome  fpeckled  or  particolour'd  Buck-skins. 
In  confideration  of  this  Prefent,  I  made  'em  another  of  lefs 
confequence.  Then  I  brought  on  a  Conference  between  the 
Oiitagamis  of  my  Company  and  the  two  Night  Meffengers,  in 
order  to  make  fome  difcovery  of  the  Nature  of  the  Country; 
but  they  ftill  ftop'd  our  Mouths  with  this  Anfwer,  that  they 
knew  nothing  of  the  Matter,  but  that  the  other  Nations  that 
liv'd  higher  up  were  able  to  inform  us.  Had  I  been  of  the 
fame  mind  with  the  Outagamis,  we  had  done  noble  Exploits  in 
this  Place :  but  I  confider'd  that  'twas  my  bufinefs  to  pur- 
chafe  the  Knowledge  of  feveral  things,  which  I  could  not 
obtain  by  burning  the  Village.  To  be  fliort,  we  re-embark'd 
that  fame  day,  about  two  a  clock  in  the  Afternoon,  and  row'd 
about  four  Leagues  up  the  River,  where  we  made  the  River 
of  [132]  the  Ofages,  and  encamp'd  by  its  Mouth. ^  That  Night 
we  had  feveral  falfe  Alarms  from  the  wild  Beeves,  upon  which 
we  made  fufficient  Reprifals  afterwards ;  for  the  next  day  we 
kill'd  many  of  'em  notwithftanding  that  it  rain'd  fo  heavily 
that  we  could  fcarce  ftir  out  of  our  Hutts.  Towards  the 
Evening,  when  the  Rain  was  over,  and  while  we  were  tran- 
fporting  two  or  three  of  thefe  Beeves  to  our  little  Camp,  we 
fpy'd  an  Army  of  the  Savages  upon  a  full  March  towards  us. 


1  The  Missouri  was  in  early  nomenclature  frequently  called  "River  of  the 
Ozages";  but  Lahontan  seems  here  to  refer  to  that  now  known  as  Osage  River. 
The  Osage  Indians  were  of  Siouan  origin,  closely  akin  to  the  Missouri  and  Kansa. 
Nearly  2,000  still  live  (1902)  upon  their  reservation  in  Oklahoma.  —  Ed. 


to  North' Am^nc2i.  203 

Upon  that,  my  Men  began  to  entrench  themfelves,  and  to 
unload  their  Pieces  with  Worms,  in  order  to  charge  'em 
afrefh ;  but  one  of  the  Pieces  happening  to  go  off,  the  whole 
Body  of  the  Enemy  difappear'd,  fome  ftraggling  one  way, 
and  fome  another:  for  thefe  People  were  upon  the  fame  foot 
with  the  Nations  that  live  upon  the  Long  River,  forafmuch  as 
neither  of  them  had  ever  feen  or  handled  Fire-Arms.  How- 
ever, this  Adventure  mov'd  the  Oiitagamis  fo  much,  that  to 
fatisfie  them,  I  was  oblig'd  to  re-embark  that  very  night,  and 
return  the  fame  way  that  I  came.  Towards  Midnight  we 
came  before  a  Village,  and  kept  a  profound  Silence  till  Day- 
break, at  which  time  we  row'd  up  to  their  Fort ;  and  upon 
our  entring  there,  and  difcharging  our  Pieces  in  the  Air,  the 
Women,  Children,  and  fuperannuated  Men,  were  put  into  fuch 
a  Confternation,  that  they  run  from  place  to  place  calling  out 
for  Mercy.  You  muft  know,  all  their  Warriours  were  abroad, 
and  'twas  a  Body  of  them  that  offer'd  to  attack  us  the  day 
before.  The  Oiitagamis  perceiving  the  Confternation  of  the 
Women  and  Children,  call'd  out,  that  they  behov'd  to  depart 
the  Village,  and  that  the  Women  fhould  have  time  to  take  up 
their  Children.  Upon  that  the  whole  Crew  turn'd  out,  and 
we  fet  fire  to  the  Village  on  all  fides.  This  done,  we  purfu'd 
our  Courfe  down  that  rapid  River,  and  enter'd  the  River 
MiJJifipi  on  the  25th,  early  in  the  Morning  :  the  26th,  about 
three  a  clock  in  the  [133]  Afternoon,  we  defcry'd  three  or 
four  hundred  Savages  employ'd  in  the  Hunting  of  Beeves, 
which  fwarmed  in  all  the  Meads  to  the  Weftward.  As  foon  as 
the  Hunters  fpy'd  us,  they  made  a  fign  that  we  fhould  make 


204  Some  New  Voyages 

towards  'em.  Being  ignorant  who,  or  how  numerous  they 
were,  we  made  a  halt  at  firft  ;  but  at  laft  we  put  in  about  a 
Musket-fhot  above  'em,  calling  out  to  'em  that  they  fhould 
not  approach  to  us  in  a  Body.  Upon  that,  four  of  their 
number  came  up  to  us  with  a  fmiling  Countenance,  and  gave 
us  to  know,  in  the  Ilinefe  Language,  that  they  were  Akanfas. 
We  could  not  but  credit  their  Report,  for  they  had  Knives 
and  Sciffars  hanging  upon  their  Necks,  and  little  Axes  about 
'em,  which  the  Ilinefe  prefent  'em  with  when  they  meet.  In 
fine,  being  affur'd  that  they  were  of  that  Nation,  which  Mr.  de 
la  Salle  and  feveral  other  French-men  were  intimately  acquainted 
with,  we  landed  at  the  fame  place  ;  and  they  entertain'd  us  firft 
with  Dancing  and  Singing,  and  then  with  all  forts  of  Meat.^ 
The  next  day  they  fhew'd  us  a  Crocodile  that  they  had 
knock'd  in  the  head  two  days  before,  by  a  Stratagem  that 
you'll  find  defcrib'd  in  another  place  :  After  that  they  gave 
us  the  diverfion  of  a  Hunting  Match;  for  'tis  cuftomary  with 
them,  when  they  mean  to  divert  themfelves,  to  catch  the 
Beeves  by  the  different  Methods  laid  down  in  this  Cut.  I 
put  fome  Queftions  to  'em  relating  to  the  Spaniards,  but  they 
could  not  refolve  'em.  All  that  I  learn'd  from  'em  was,  that 
the  Mijfouris  and  the  Ofages  are  numerous   and   mifchievous 


^  The  Akansas  (Arkansas)  was  the  name  by  which  the  French  designated  the 
great  Siouan  tribe  of  Quapaw.  Dorsey  (see  p.  200,  note  3,  ante)  thinks  it  was  an 
Illinois  term  for  all  that  stock  who  lived  on  the  banks  of  the  Ohio,  whence  the 
Quapaw  moved  southward  (before  1540)  to  the  region  of  the  river  now  known  as 
Arkansas.  In  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century  numerous  bands  of  Arkansas 
lived  along  the  river  of  that  name.  About  three  hundred  yet  survive  in  Oklahoma. 
For  La  Salle's  adventures  among  the  Arkansas,  see  Membre's  account  in  Shea,  Dis- 
covery and  Exploration  of  Mississippi  Valley  (New  York,  1853) ,  pp.  169-172.  — Ed. 


to  North- Am^nc2i,  205 

Nations,  equally  void  both  of  Courage  and  Honefty ;  that 
their  Countries  were  water'd  with  very  great  Rivers ;  and,  in 
a  word,  were  too  good  for  them. 

After  we  had  fpent  two  days  with  them,  we  purfued  our 
Voyage  to  the  River  Oiiabach^  taking  care  to  watch  the  Croco- 
diles very  narrowly,  of  which  they  had  told  us  incredible  Stories. 
The  next  day  we  enter'd  the  Mouth  of  that  River,  and  founded 
'^  [134]  to  try  the  truth  of  what  the  Savages  reported  of  its 
depth.  In  efiFed,  we  found  there  three  Fathom  and  a  half 
Water;  but  the  Savages  of  our  Company  alledg'd,  that  'twas 
more  fwell'd  than  ufually.^  They  all  agreed,  that  'twas  Navi- 
gable an  hundred  Leagues  up,  and  I  wifh'd  heartily,  that  my 
time  had  allow'd  me  to  run  up  to  its  Source  ;  but  that  being 
unfeafonable,  I  fail'd  up  againft  the  Stream,  till  we  came  to  the 
River  of  the  Illinefe,  which  we  made  on  the  ^th  of  April  with 
fome  difficulty,  for  the  Wind  was  againft  us  the  firft  two  days, 
and  the  Currents  was  very  rapid.^ 

All  I  can  fay  of  the  River  MiJJifipi^  now  that  I  am  to  take 
leave  of  it,  is,  that  its  narroweft  part  is  half  a  League  over, 
and   the  fhalloweft  is  a  Fathom   and  a  half  deep  ;    and  that 


1  The  Ohio  River  was  usually  designated  as  the  Wabash  (Ouabache)  below 
the  mouth  of  the  present  river  of  that  name.  Marquette  gave  it  the  title  Ouabou- 
skiguo,  which  the  French  soon  corrupted  into  Ouabache.  The  upper  reaches  of  the 
Ohio  were  early  known  by  the  name  it  now  bears.  —  Ed. 

2  Jolliet  and  Marquette  named  the  Illinois  River  St.  Louis.  Several  names  were 
later  given  it;  Seignelay  (by  Hennepin) ,  Riviere  Divine,  etc.  For  an  explanation 
of  these  titles  see  Parkman,  La  Salle,  p.  154  note.  This  river,  about  three  hundred 
and  fifty  miles  in  length,  is  entirely  in  the  state  of  the  same  name.  Its  easy  naviga- 
tion made  it  of  much  value  as  a  connecting  link  between  the  great  lakes  and  the 
Mississippi.  —  Ed. 


2o6  Some  New  Voyages 

according  to  the  information  of  the  Savages,  its  ftream  is 
pretty  gentle  for  feven  or  eight  Months  of  the  year.  As  for 
Shelves  or  Banks  of  Sand,  I  met  with  none  in  it.  'Tis  full  of 
Ifles  which  look  like  Groves,  by  reafon  of  the  great  plenty 
of  Trees,  and  in  the  verdant  feafon  of  the  year  afford  a  very 
agreeable  profpe(5l.  Its  Banks  are  Woods,  Meadows  and 
Hills.  I  cannot  be  pofitive,  whether  it  winds  much  in  other 
places ;  but  as  far  as  I  could  fee,  its  courfe  is  very  different 
from  that  of  our  Rivers  in  France;  for  I  muft  tell  you  by  the 
way,  that  all  the  Rivers  of  America  run  pretty  ftraight. 

The  River  of  the  Illineje  is  intitled  to  Riches,  by  vertue  of 
the  benign  Climate,  and  of  the  great  quantities  of  Deer,  Roe- 
Bucks,  and  Turkeys  that  feed  upon  its  brinks :  Not  to  men- 
tion feveral  other  Beafts  and  Fowls,  a  defcription  of  which 
would  require  an  intire  Volume.  If  you  faw  but  my  Journal, 
you  would  be  fick  of  the  tedious  particulars  of  our  daily 
Adventures  both  in  Hunting  and  Fifhing  divers  fpecies  of 
Animals,  and  in  Rencounters  with  the  Savages.  In  fhort,  the 
laft  thing  I  fhall  mention  of  this  [135]  River,  is,  that  the 
Banks  are  replenifh'd  with  an  infinity  of  Fruit-Trees,  which 
we  faw  in  a  difmal  condition,  as  being  ftrip'd  of  their  verdure; 
and  that  among  thefe  Fruit-Trees,  there  are  many  Vines, 
which  bear  mofl  beautiful  Clufters  of  very  large  Grapes.  I 
ate  fome  of  thefe  Grapes  dry'd  in  the  Sun,  which  had  a  moft 
delicious  Tafte.  The  Beavers  are  as  unfrequent  in  this,  as  in 
the  long  River,  where  I  faw  nothing  but  Otters,  of  which  the 
People  make  Furs  for  the  Winter. 

I  fet  out  from  the  Illineje  River  on  the  lOth  of  Aprils  and 


to  North-hvnmc2i,  207 

by  the  help  of  a  Weft-South-Weft  Wind,  arriv'd  in  fix  days 
at  the  Fort  of  Crevecoeiir,  where  I  met  with  Mr.  de  Tonti,  who 
receiv'd  me  with  all  imaginable  Civility,  and  is  juftly  refpeded 
and  honour'd  by  the  Iroqiiefe}  I  ftay'd  three  days  in  this 
Fort,  where  there  were  thirty  Coureurs  de  Bois  that  traded  with 
the  Illinefe.  The  20th  I  arriv'd  at  the  Village  of  the  IlUnefe;. 
and  to  leffen  the  drudgery  of  a  great  Land-carriage  of  twelve 
great  Leagues,  ingag'd  four  hundred  Men  to  tranfport  our 
Baggage,  which  they  did  in  the  fpace  of  four  days,  being 
incourag'd  by  a  Bribe  of  a  great  Roll  of  Brafd  Tobacco,  an 
hundred  pound  weight  of  Powder,  two  hundred  weight  of 
Ball,  and  fome  Arms,  which  I  gave  to  the  moft  confiderable 
Men  of  their  number.  The  i^th  I  arriv'd  at  Chekakou,  where 
my  Outagamis  took  leave  of  me  in  order  to  return  to  their  own 
Country,  being  very  well  fatisfied  with  a  Prefent  I  made  'em 
of  fome  Fufees,  and  fome  Piftols.^  The  i^th  I  reimbarqued, 
and  by  rowing  hard  in  a  Calm,  made  the  River  of  the  Oumamis 
on  the  2Stb.     There  I  met  four  hundred  Warriours,  upon  the 

1  If  Lahontan  had  really  been  at  Tonty's  fort  on  the  Illinois,  he  would  have 
known  better  than  to  call  it  Fort  Crevecoeur.  The  latter  was  the  fort  built  near  the 
site  of  Peoria,  111.,  on  La  Salle's  first  journey  to  Illinois,  and  destroyed  by  mutineer- 
ing  soldiers  two  months  later  (Jan. -March,  1680).  Tonty  was  at  this  time  in  com- 
mand at  Fort  St.  Louis,  built  (1682)  on  "  La  Rocher  "  farther  up  the  river  near  the 
present  Utica.  For  its  later  history  see  p.  133,  note  r,  ante.  Lahontan  probably 
intended  to  say  that  Tonty  was  respected  and  honored  by  the  Illinois,  not  the  Iroquois, 
against  whom  he  waged  frequent  wars.  —  Ed. 

2  The  portage  at  Chicago  was  first  made  known  to  the  French  by  the  voyage  of 
Jolliet  and  Marquette,  who  returned  to  Mackinac  by  this  route  (1672).  They  re- 
ported it  as  very  convenient  for  settlement  (Jes.  ReL,  Iviii,  pp.  105,  107);  but  La 
Salle  wrote  less  favorably  of  the  site,  and  that  a  canal  would  be  very  expensive.  The 
connection  between  Chicago  River  and  the  Illinois  is  now  secured  by  the  Chicago 
drainage  canal,  between  that  city  and  Joliet,  111.  —  Ed. 


2o8  Some  New  Voyages 

very  fame  place  where  Mr.  de  la  Salle  had  formerly  built  a 
Fort.^  Thefe  Warriours  were  then  imploy'd  in  burning  three 
Iroquefe,  who,  as  they  faid,  deferv'd  the  Punifhment ;  and 
invited  us  to  fhare  in  the  pleafure  of  the  Show ;  for  the 
Savages  take  it  very  ill  if  one  [136]  refufes  the  diverfion  of 
fuch  real  Tragedies.  The  Tragical  fpe6lacle  made  me  fhrink, 
for  the  poor  wretches  were  put  to  inconceiveable  Torture; 
and  upon  that  I  refolv'd  to  reimbarque  with  all  expedition ; 
alledging  for  an  Apology,  that  my  Men  had  great  ftore  of 
Brandy  with  'em,  and  would  certainly  make  themfelves  drunk, 
in  folemnifing  their  Vidory,  upon  which  they  would  be  apt 
to  commit  diforders,  that  I  could  not  poflibly  prevent.  Ac- 
cordingly I  went  immediately  on  board,  and  after  coafhing 
along  the  Lake,  crofs'd  the  Bay  de  VOurs,  and  landed  at  Mif- 
filimakinac  the  iid} 

I  am  inform'd  by  the  Sieur  de  S.  Pierre  de  Repantigni,  who 
travel'd  from  Quebec  hither  upon  the  Ice,  that  Mr.  de  Denonville 
has  took  up  a  refolution  of  making  a  Peace  with  the  Iroquefe^  in 


1  The  River  of  the  Miamis  was  that  now  known  as  St.  Joseph,  which  flows  into 
Lake  Michigan  in  Berrien  County,  Mich.  La  Salle  built  a  fort  at  this  place  in 
November,  1679,  which  was  destroyed  the  next  spring  by  the  deserters  from  Fort 
Crevecoeur.  In  the  autumn  of  the  same  year  it  was  rebuilt  by  La  Salle's  lieutenant 
La  Forest,  and  there  the  great  explorer  spent  the  ensuing  winter.  The  Jesuits 
founded  a  mission  to  the  Miamis  about  sixty  miles  up  the  river,  near  the  present 
Niles,  Mich.  The  mission  and  the  fort  afterwards  built  were  known  as  St. 
Joseph.  —  Ed. 

2 The  Bay  de  I'Ours  qui  Dort  (Bay  of  Sleeping  Bears)  was  that  now  called 
Grand  Traverse  Bay,  Mich.  This  name  appears  upon  nearly  all  French  maps  until 
the  English  conquest  (1760).  The  first  English  maps  designate  it  as  Grand  Bay; 
later,  it  acquired  its  present  appellation.  The  French  name  was  doubtless  given 
because  of  a  fancied  resemblance  in  the  rocky  headlands  to  sleeping  bears,  —  Ed, 


to  North- Amtv\c2i.  209 

which  he  means  to  comprehend  the  other  Nations  that  are  his 
Allies ;  and  with  that  view  had  given  notice  to  his  Allies,  that 
they  fhould  not  infeft  the  Iroqiiefe}  He  acquaints  me  further, 
that  Mr.  de  Denonville  has  fent  orders  to  the  Governour  of 
this  place,  to  perfwade  the  Rat^  (one  of  the  Commanders  of 
the  Hurons)  to  go  down  to  the  Colony,  with  a  defign,  to  have 
him  hang'd ;  and  that  the  Savage  General  being  aware  of 
the  defign,  has  made  a  publick  Declaration,  that  he  will  go 
thither  on  purpofe  to  defie  him.  Accordingly  he  defigns  to 
fet  out  to  Morrow  with  a  great  body  of  Oiitaouas^  and  fome 
Coureurs  de  Boh,  under  the  command  of  Mr.  Dulhut.  As  for 
the  Soldiers  of  my  Detachment,  I  have  difpers'd  'em  in  feveral 
Canows  among  the  Savages,  and  the  Coureurs  de  Bois ;  but 
having  fome  bufinefs  to  adjuft  in  this  place,  I  am  oblig'd  to 
tarry  my  felf  feven  or  eight  days  longer. 

This,  Sir,  is  the  true  account  of  my  little  Voyage.  I  have 
related  nothing  but  the  Effential  Circumftances ;  choofmg  to 
overlook  the  reft,  which  are  fo  trifling,  as  to  be  unworthy  of 
your  Curiofity.  [137]  As  for  the  lUinefe  Lake,  'tis  three  hun- 
dred Leagues  in  Circumference,  as  you  may  fee  by  the  Scale 
of  Leagues  upon  the  Map.     'Tis  feated  in  an  admirable  Cli- 


^  Jean  Paul  le  Gardeur,  sieur  de  St.  Pierre  de  Repentigny,  was  grandson  of  a 
Norman  gentleman  of  good  family,  who  early  settled  in  Canada;  and,  on  his  mother's 
side,  of  Jean  Nicolet,  first  explorer  of  Wisconsin.  He  had  seen  service  in  the  Nortli- 
west,  probably  under  Du  Luth.  He  was  in  1689  sent  by  Denonville  with  orders  for 
the  destruction  of  Fort  Frontenac,  and  distinguished  himself  as  an  ofHcer  in  both 
King  William's  (1689-97)  and  Queen  Anne's  (1702-13)  wars.  In  1718  he  built 
the  French  post  at  Chequamegon  Bay,  on  Lake  Superior.  His  son  Jacques,  second 
sieur  de  St.  Pierre,  was  the  officer  whom  Washington  encountered  upon  the  Alle- 
gheny (1753).  — Ed. 

14 


2IO  Some  New  Voyages 

mate ;   its  Banks  are  cloath'd  with  fine   and   tall  Trees,  and 
have  but  few  Meads.    The  River  of  the  Oumamis  is  not  worth 
your  regard.     The  Bay  de  I'Onrs  qui  dort,  is  of  an  indifferent 
large  extent,  and  receives  the  River  upon  which  the  Outaouas 
are  wont  to  hunt  Beavers  every  third  year.     In  {hort,  it  has 
neither  Shelves,  Rocks,  nor  Banks  of  Sand.     The  Land  which 
bounds  it  on  the  South  fide,  is  replenifii'd  with  Roe-bucks, 
Deer,   and  Turkeys.     Farewel,   Good  Sir  :   And  affure  your 
felf,  that  'twill  always  be  a  fenfible  pleafure  to  me,  to  amufe 
you  with  an  account  of  the  greateft  Curiofities  I  meet  with. 
But  now.  Sir,  I  hope  you  will  not  take  it  ill,  that  the  Re- 
lation I  here  give  you,  is  only  an  Abridgment  of  my  Voyage : 
For,  in  earneft,  to  be  minute  upon  every  particular  Curiofity, 
would  require  more  time  and  leifure  than  I  can  fpare.     I  have 
here  fent  you  a  view  of  the  fubftantial  part ;  and  fhall  after- 
wards hope  for  an  opportunity  of  recounting  to  you  by  word 
of  Mouth,  an  infinity  of  Adventures,  Rencounters,  and  Obfer- 
vations,  which  may  call  up  the  refleding  faculty  of  thinking 
Men.     My  own  Thought  is  too  Superficial  to  philofophife 
upon  the  Origin,  the  Belief,  the  Manners  and  Cuftoms  of  fo 
many  Savages ;  or  to  m.ake  any  advances  with  reference  to  the 
extent  of  this  Continent  to  the  Weftward.     I  have  contented 
my  felf  with  offering  fome  thoughts  upon  the  caufes  of  the 
bad  fuccefs  of  the  Difcoveries,  that  feveral  experienc'd  Men 
have  attempted  in  America^  both  by  Sea  and  Land  :  And  ! 
flatter  my  felf,  that  my  thoughts  upon  that  head  are  juft.    The 
frefh  Inftances  of  Mr.  de  hi  Salle,  and  feveral  other  unlucky 
Difcoverers,  may  afford  a  fufiicient  and  feafonable  caution  to 


to  North' AiTimc2i.  211 

[138]  thofe,  who  for  the  future  fhall  undertake  to  difcover  all 
the  unknown  Countries  of  this  New  World.  'Tis  not  every 
one  that's  qualify'd  for  fuch  an  Enterprife,  non  licet  omnibus 
adire  Corintbum.  'Twere  an  eafie  matter  to  trace  the  utmoft 
limits  of  the  Country  that  lies  to  the  Weft  of  Canada,  pro- 
vided it  be  gone  about  in  a  proper  Method.  In  the  firft 
place,  inftead  of  Canows,  I  would  have  fuch  Adventurers  to 
make  ufe  of  certain  Sloops  of  a  peculiar  Strudlure,  which 
might  draw  but  little  Water,  and  be  portable,  as  being  made 
of  light  Wood  ;  and  withall  carry  thirteen  Men,  with  35  or  40 
hundred  weight  of  Stowage,  and  be  able  to  bear  the  fhock  of 
the  Waves  in  the  great  Lakes.  Courage,  Health,  and  Vigi- 
lance, are  not  fufficient  of  themfelves  to  qualifie  a  Man  for 
fuch  Adventures ;  he  ought  to  be  poffefs'd  of  other  Talents, 
which  are  rarely  met  with  in  one  and  the  fame  Perfon.  The 
Condu6l  of  the  three  hundred  Men  that  accompany'd  me  upon 
this  Difcovery,  gave  me  a  great  deal  of  trouble.  It  requires 
a  large  ftock  of  Induftry  and  Patience,  to  keep  fuch  a  Com- 
pany up  to  their  Duty.  Sedition,  Mutinies,  Quarrels,  and  an 
infinity  of  diforders  frequently  take  place  among  thofe,  who 
being  in  remote  and  folitary  Places,  think  they  have  a  right 
of  ufing  force  againft  their  Superiours.  One  muft  diffemble, 
and  even  fhut  his  Eyes  upon  occafion,  leaft  the  growing  Evil 
fhould  be  inflam'd  :  The  gentleft  Methods  are  the  fureft,  for 
him  that  commands  in  Chief;  and  if  any  Mutiny  or  Seditious 
Plot  is  in  view,  'tis  the  bufinefs  of  the  inferior  Officers  to  ftifle 
it,  by  perfwading  the  Mutineers,  that  the  difcovery  of  fuch 
things  to  the  Commanding  Officer,  would  create  a  great  deal 


212  Some  New  Voyages 

of  uneafinefs.  So,  the  chief  OfHcer  muft  ftill  make  as  if  he 
were  ignorant  of  what  paffes,  unlefs  it  be,  that  the  flame  breaks 
out  in  his  Prefence  ;  then  indeed  he  lies  under  an  indifpenfible 
Obligation,  of  infliding  fpeedy  [139]  and  private  punifhment, 
without  his  prudence  diredls  him  to  put  off  the  Execution, 
upon  an  apprehenfion  of  fome  pernicious  confequences  that 
may  infue  thereupon.  In  fuch  Voyages  he  muft  overlook  a 
thoufand  things,  which  upon  other  occalions  he  has  all  reafon 
to  punifh.  He  muft  counterfeit  a  downright  ignorance  of 
their  Intrigues  with  the  She-Savages,  of  their  Quarrels  among 
themfelves,  of  their  negligence  in  not  mounting  the  Guard, 
and  not  obferving  the  other  points  of  Duty;  in  a  word,  he 
muft  pretend  to  know  nothing  of  an  Infinity  of  fuch  Diforders, 
as  have  no  diredl  tendency  to  a  Revolt.  He  ought  to  ufe  the 
precaution  of  fingling  out  a  Spy  in  his  little  Army,  and  reward 
him  handfomly  for  a  dexterous  Intelligence  as  to  all  that  hap- 
pens ;  to  the  end  that  he  may  remedy  the  growing  diforders 
either  diredly  or  indirectly.  This  Spie  may  by  good  manage- 
ment, and  due  fecrecy  find  out  the  Ringleader  of  a  Club  or 
Cabal;  and  when  the  Commanding  Officer  has  receiv'd  fuch 
fatisfadlion  upon  the  matter,  that  there's  no  room  left  to  doubt 
of  the  Criminal's  Demerit ;  'twill  then  be  very  convenient  to 
make  away  with  him,  and  that  with  fuch  management,  that  no 
body  Ihould  know  what  became  of  him. 

Farther :  He  ought  to  give  'em  Tobacco  and  Brandy  now 
and  then,  to  ask  their  advice  upon  fome  occafions,  to  fatigue 
'em  as  little  as  poffible,  to  call  'em  up  to  dance  and  make 


to  iVor/Z>- America.  213 

merry,  and  at  the  fame  time  to  exhort  'em  to  live  in  a  good 
underftanding  with  one  another.  The  beft  Topiclc  he  can 
make  ufe  of  for  inforcing  their  Duty,  is  Religion,  and  the 
Honour  of  their  Country,  and  this  he  ought  to  defcant  upon 
himfelf :  For  though  I  have  a  great  deal  of  Faith  in  the  power 
of  the  Clergy ;  yet  I  know  that  fort  of  Men  do's  more  harm 
than  good,  in  Voyages  of  this  nature;  and  for  that  reafon  I'd 
choofe  to  be  without  their  Company.  The  Perfon  [140]  who 
undertakes  to  go  upon  a  Difcovery,  ought  to  be  very  nice  and 
cautious  in  the  choice  of  his  Men ;  for  every  one  is  not  fit  for 
his  bufinefs.  His  Men  ought  to  be  between  30  and  40  years 
of  Age,  of  a  dry  Conflitution,  of  a  peaceable  Temper,  of  an 
adlive  and  bold  Spirit,  and  inur'd  to  the  fatigues  of  Voyages. 
The  whole  Retinue  muft  confift  of  three  hundred  Men  ;  and 
of  that  number  there  muft  be  fome  Ship-Carpenters,  Gun- 
fmiths,  and  Sawyers  with  all  their  Tools  ;  befides  Huntfmen, 
and  Fiihermen  with  their  Tackling.  You  muft  likewife  have 
Surgeons  among  'em,  but  their  Cheft  ought  to  contain  nothing 
but  Razours,  Lancets,  External  Medicines  for  Wounds,  Or- 
vietan  and  Senna.  All  the  Men  of  the  Detachment,  ought 
to  be  provided  with  BufT-Coats  and  Boots  to  turn  the  Arrows  ; 
for,  as  I  intimated  above,  the  Savages  of  the  unknown  Coun- 
tries are  ftrangers  to  Fire-Arms.  They  muft  be  arm'd  with  a 
double  barrel'd  Gun,  a  double  barrel'd  Piftol,  and  a  good  long 
Sword.  The  Commanding  Officer  muft  take  care  to  provide 
a  fufficient  quantity  of  the  Skins  of  Deer,  Elks,  and  Beeves, 
in  order  to  be  few'd  together,  and  hung  round  his  Camps 


214  Some  New  Voyages 

upon  certain   Stakes  fix'd  at  convenient  diftances  from  one 
another.     I  had  as  many  as  would  go  round  a  fquare  of  thirty 
Foot  every  way  ;    for  each  Skin  being  five  Foot  deep,  and 
almoft  four  Foot  broad,  I  made  two  pieces  of  eight  Skins  a 
piece,  which  were  rais'd  and  extended  in  a  Minute.     Befides 
thefe,  he  ought  to  carry  with  him  fome  Pot-Guns  of  eight 
Foot  in  length,  and  fix  in  breadth ;  with  two  Hand-Mills  for 
grinding  the  Indian  Corn,  Nails  of  all  fizes.  Pickaxes,  Spades, 
Hatchets,   Hooks,   Soap,   and   Cotton  to  make  Candles  of. 
Above  all,  he  muft  not  forget  to  take  in  good  flore  of  Pow- 
der, Brandy,  Brafil  Tobacco,  and  fuch  things  as  he  muft  pre- 
fent  to  the  Savages  whofe  Country  he  difcovers.    Add  to  this 
Cargo,  an  Aftrolabe,  a  Semicircle,  feveral  [141]  Sea-Compaffes, 
fome  Simple,  and  fome  of  Variation,  a  Load-ftone,  two  large 
Watches  of  three   Inches   Diameter;    Pencils,   Colours,  and 
Paper,  for  making  Journals  and  Maps,  for  the  defigning  of 
Land-Creatures,  Fowl,  Fifh,  Trees,  Plants,  Grain,  and  in  a 
word,  whatever  feems  worthy  of  his  Curiofity.     I  would  like- 
wife  advife  him  to  carry  with  him  fome  Trumpeters  and  Fid- 
lers,  both  for  animating  his  Retinue,  and  raifmg  the  admira- 
tion of  the  Savages.    With  this  Equipage,  Sir,  a  Man  of  Senfe, 
Condud,  and  Adion,  I  mean,  a  Man  that's  Vigilant,  Prudent, 
Cautious,  and  above  all.  Patient  and  Moderate,  and  qualify'd 
for  contriving  Expedients  upon  all  occafions ;  a  Man,  I  fay, 
thus  qualify'd,  and  thus  fitted  out,  may  boldly  go  to  all  the 
Countries  that  lye  to  the  Weft  of  Canada,  without  any  appre- 
henfion  of  danger.     As  for  my  own  part,  I  ferioufly  declare, 


to  North-Am^ncz.  215 

that  if  I  were  poffefs'd  of  all  thefe  qualities,  I  fhould  efteem 
it  my  happinefs  to  be  imploy'd  upon  fuch  an  Enterprife,  both 
for  the  Glory  of  his  Majefty,  and  my  own  Satisfaction :  For 
the  continu'd  diverfity  of  Objedls,  did  fo  charm  me  in  my 
Voyages,  that  I  had  fcarce  time  to  refled  upon  the  fatigue 
and  trouble  that  I  underwent.     I  am, 

SIR, 

Tours,  &c. 


2i6  Some  New  Voyages 


[142]       LETTER    XVII. 

Dated  at  Quebec  September  28.  1689. 
The  Author  Jets  out  from  MifTilimakinac  to  the  Colony,  and  defcribes 
the  Country,  Rivers,  and  Pajjes  that  he  Jaw  by  the  way.  The 
Iroquefe  make  a  fatal  incurfion  into  the  IJland  of  Monreal : 
Fort  Frontenac  is  abandon'd.  Count  Frontenac  is  fent  to 
Canada,  and  the  Marquis  of  Denonville  is  recall'd. 

SIR, 

I  WRIT  to  you  from  Miffilimakinac  on  the  28/^  of  May.  I 
left  that  place  June  the  ^th,  and  fet  out  for  Monreal,  ac- 
company'd  with  twelve  Outaouas,  who  were  divided  into  two 
Canows,  and  row'd  very  hard.  The  23^,  I  overtook  the 
Coureurs  de  Bois  in  the  River  Creufe,  who  had  got  the  ftart 
of  me  for  fome  days.^  Mr.  Dulhut  us'd  his  utmoft  efforts  to 
diffwade  me  from  going  further  with  fo  weak  a  Retinue.  He 
would  have  had  me  to  go  down  along  with  him ;  and  remon- 
ftrated  to  me,  that  if  my  twelve  Conduders  perceiv'd  either  in 
the  Land-carriage  or  upon  the  Rivers,  any  thing  that  might 
call  up  an  apprehenfion  of  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  Iro- 
quefe, they  would  defert  me  and  the  Canows,  and  fly  to  the 

iThe  Riviere  Creuse  — called  by  the  English  Deep  River  — is  not  a  separate 
stream,  but  the  long,  deep,  still  part  of  the  Ottawa  River,  extending  for  many  miles 
above  the  Allumettes  Rapids  and  Islands.  Lahontan  apparently  gives  that  name  to 
all  of  the  Upper  Ottawa  or  to  the  Mattawan.  —  Ed. 


to  N orth- Amtnc2i.  217 

Woods  to  avoid  the  Enemy.  I  rejedled  his  Advice,  though  I 
had  like  to  have  repented  of  my  refolution  not  long  after  ;  for 
according  to  his  Predidion,  my  Canow-Men  threaten'd  to  run 
away  to  the  Forrefts,  at  the  Fall  call'd  Long  Saut'^:  And  indeed 
if  they  had  done  it,  I  had  follow'd  'em,  upon  the  refledion, 
that  of  two  Evils  a  Man  ought  [143]  to  choofe  the  leaft ;  but 
this  Storm  blew  over.  In  the  great  River  of  the  Outaouas,  not 
far  from  the  River  of  Lievre,^  I  met  Mr.  de  St.  Helene  at  the 
Head  of  a  Party  of  the  Coiireurs  de  BoiSf  who  was  bound  for 
Hud/on's  Bay,  in  order  to  retake  fome  Forts  that  the  Engli/h 
had  feiz'd  upon.^  He  acquainted  me  with  the  Prince  of 
Orange's  Expedition  for  England;  and  gave  me  to  underftand, 
that  upon  his  arrival  King  James  retir'd  to  France^  and  that 
the  Prince  was  proclaim'd  King,  which  feem'd  to  prefage  a 
bloody  and  fharp  War  in  Europe.  I  affure  you,  Sir,  this  piece 
of  News  furpriz'd  me  extreamly ;  and  notwithftanding  that  I 


1  This  was  the  Long  Sault  of  the  Ottawa,  not  that  of  the  St.  Lawrence,  for  which 
see  p.  68,  note  i,  ante.  The  former,  about  three  miles  in  length,  is  on  the  Ottawa 
above  the  Lake  of  Two  Mountains,  and  is  now  avoided  by  the  Grenville  Canal.  It 
was  at  the  lower  end  of  these  rapids  that  occurred  the  heroic  defense  of  Canada 
by  Dollard  and  his  companions  (1661).  See  Parkman,  Old  Regime  in  Canada, 
chap.  3.  —  Ed. 

^  Riviere  au  Lievre  descends  from  the  north  and  enters  the  Ottawa  about  three 
miles  above  the  upper  end  of  the  Long  Sault.  —  Ed. 

'  For  Jacques  le  Moyne,  Sieur  de  St.  Helene,  see  p.  118,  note  i,  ante.  He  was 
carrying  supplies  and  despatches  to  his  brother  Iberville,  who  was  in  command  of  the 
forts  which  the  French  had  captured  (1686)  in  Hudson  Bay.  Two  English  ships 
had  been  sent  to  recover  these;  during  St.  Helene's  absence,  Iberville  succeeded  in 
capturing  both  of  these  vessels,  with  their  officers  and  crews.  Iberville  had  sent 
messengers  to  the  governor  of  Canada,  who  left  Fort  Albany  (Fr.,  St.  Anne)  Jan.  5, 
1689,  and  came  overland  on  snowshoes.  See  Charlevoix,  History  of  Ne-a;  France 
(Shea's  trans.),  iv,  pp.  37-40.  —  Ed. 


2i8  Some  New  Voyages 

had  it  from  the  Mouth  of  a  Man,  whofe  word  I  rely  very  much 
upon,  yet  I  had  all  the  difficulty  in  the  World  to  make  my  felf 
believe,  that  a  Revolution  of  fuch  Importance  could  be  accom- 
plifh'd  in  fo  fhort  a  time,  without  the  effufion  of  Blood ;  efpe- 
cially  confidering  what  a  flrid  Alliance  there  was  between  our 
Court,  and  the  Court  of  England^  and  how  much  'twas  the 
intereft  of  both  thefe  Monarchs  to  give  mutual  affiftance  to 
one  another.  July  the  (^th  I  arriv'd  at  Monreal,  after  venturing 
down  feveral  fearful  Catarads  in  the  River  of  the  Outaouas, 
and  induring  the  hardfhips  of  fifteen  or  twenty  Land-carriages, 
fome  of  which  are  above  a  League  in  length. 

The  Navigation  is  prety  fure  from  Mijfilimakinac  to  the 
River  des  Francois;  for  in  coafting  along  the  Lake  of  Hurons, 
we  meet  with  an  infinity  of  Iflands,  which  ferve  for  a  fhelter.^ 
But  in  going  up  that  River,  there's  fome  difficulty,  for  it  has 
five  Cataradls  which  oblige  us  to  turn  out  and  carry  all  over- 
land for  thirty,  fifty,  and  a  hundred  Paces.  Having  pafs'd 
that  River,  we  enter'd  the  Lake  of  the  Nepicerinis,  from 
whence  we  are  forc'd  to  tranfport  our  Canows  and  Baggage 
two  Leagues  over-land,  to  another  River  which  has  fix  or  feven 
Water-falls  that  we  commonly  fhoot.^     From  that  River  we 


^  The  distance  from  Mackinac  to  the  mouth  of  French  River,  in  Georgian  Bay,  is 
nearly  200  miles,  taking  as  direct  a  course  as  possible  among  the  islands  of  the  North 
Channel.  French  River  (River  des  Franfais)  was  so  called  because  it  was  the 
accustomed  waterway  of  the  French  voyageurs,  who  on  account  of  the  hostility  of  the 
Iroquois,  found  the  difficult  route  via  the  Ottawa,  Lake  Nipissing,  and  French  River 
more  practicable  than  the  Great  Lakes.  —  Ed. 

2  French  River  is  fifty-five  miles  long,  and  filled  with  rapids  and  falls.  Lake 
Nipissing  was  named  from  the  tribe  of  Algonquian  Indians  first  encountered  on  its 
banks,  some  of  whose  descendants  still  live  on  a  reservation  on  the  north  bank  of  the 


to  iVor^/&- America.  219 

have  another  [144]  Land-carriage  to  the  River  Creiife,  which 
falls  with  rapid  Currents  into  the  great  River  of  the  Outaouas, 
near  a  place  call'd  Mataotian}  We  continue  our  courfe  upon 
this  great  River,  till  we  come  to  the  point  of  the  Ifland  of 
Monreal,  where  'tis  loft  in  the  great  River  of  St.  Laurence. 
Thefe  two  Rivers  joyn  one  another  with  very  gentle  Streams, 
and  quitting  their  fearful  Channels  form  the  little  Lake  of 
St.  Louis.  I  thought  to  have  loft  my  Life  at  the  fall,  call'd  the 
fall  of  St.  Louis,  about  three  Leagues  from  Monreal,  for  our 
Canow  having  overfet  in  the  Eddy,  I  was  carry'd  by  the  Cur- 
rent to  the  foot  of  that  Cataradl,  from  whence  the  Chevalier 
de  Vaudreuil  drag'd  me  out  by  a  great  chance.^  The  Canows 
and  the  Skins  belonging  to  the  fix  Savages  were  loft ;  and  one 
of  the  Savages  was  drown'd.  This  is  the  only  time  I  was  in 
danger,  through  the  whole  courfe  of  my  Voyages.  As  foon  as 
I  landed  here,  I  repair'd  with  diligence  to  a  Tavern  to  refrefh 
my  felf,  and  to  make  up  the  loffes  I  had  fuftain'd  by  a  neceffary 
Abftinence.     The  next  day  I  waited  upon  Mr.  de  Denonville, 

lake.  From  the  eastern  end  of  this  lake,  the  route  lay  for  a  mile  and  a  half  along 
Riviere  de  Vase  (Muddy  River) ,  whence  the  Portage  au  Vase,  of  about  four  miles,  led 
over  the  watershed  to  Trout  Lake,  the  source  of  River  Mattawan.  This  river  flows 
east  into  the  Ottawa,  is  about  thirty-four  miles  long,  and  has  in  it  fourteen  rapids, 
some  of  which  are  very  difficult.  For  details  of  this  route,  see  Alexander  Henry, 
Travels  and  Ad'ventures  (Bain  ed.),  pp.  28-37;  Mackenzie,  Voyages  through  the 
Continent  of  North  America  (London,  1801),  pp.  xxix-xxxvii.  —  Ed. 

1  Mattawan  is  now  a  town  at  the  junction  of  River  Mattawan  with  the  Ottawa  ; 
it  is  three  hundred  miles  from  Montreal.  Champlain  utilized  this  route  in  his  voyage 
to  the  Hurons  (1615).  —  Ed. 

2  For  Lake  St.  Louis  and  the  fall  of  the  same  name,  see  p.  66,  note  i,  ante. 
Lachine  Rapids  were  frequently  dangerous  to  the  returning  voyageur,  who  had 
escaped  all  the  perils  of  the  upper  country.  Joiliet  here  lost  his  papers  on  his  return 
from  the  famous  exploration  of  1673.  —  E^- 


220  Some  New  Voyages 

and  Mr.  de  Champigni^  to  whom  I  gave  an  account  of  my 
Voyages,  and  withal,  gave  in  the  News  that  a  great  company 
of  the  Coureurs  de  Bois  and  Savages  would  arrive  very  fpeedily ; 
which  they  did  accordingly  after  fifteen  days.  The  Rat  I 
mention'd  above  came  down  hither,  and  return'd  home  not- 
withftanding  the  threats  that  were  levell'd  againft  him.  By 
this  Adventure,  he  fhew'd  that  he  laugh'd  at  their  Intrigues. 
But  now  that  I  have  mention'd  his  name,  I  cannot  forbear 
mentioning  a  mahcious  Stratagem  that  this  cunning  Savage 
made  ufe  of  laft  year,  to  prevent  the  conclufion  of  a  Peace 
between  Mr.  de  Denonville  and  the  Iroquefe. 

This  Savage  is  the  general  and  chief  Counfellour  of  the 
Hurons  ;  he  is  a  Man  of  forty  years  of  Age,  and  brave  in  his 
way.  When  he  found  himfelf  [145]  prefs'd  and  importun'd 
by  Mr.  de  Denonville^  to  enter  into  the  Alliance  concluded  in 
the  year  1687,  that  I  took  notice  of  before  ;  he  at  laft  comply'd 
with  his  defire,  with  this  referve,  that  the  War  fhould  not 
be  put  to  an  end  till  the  Iroquefe  were  totally  routed.  This 
claufe  the  Governour  promis'd  to  make  good,  and  gave  him 
affurances  to  that  purpofe  on  the  3^  of  September^  in  the  fame 
year,  which  happen'd  about  two  days  before  I  fet  out  from 
Niagara^  upon  my  Voyage  to  the  great  Lakes.  This  Savage- 
General  relying  upon  Mr.  de  Denonville^s  promife,  march'd 
from  Mijfiliinakinac  at  the  Head  of  an  hundred  Warriours  as 
I  infinuated  in  my  i^th  Letter,  in  order  to  invade  the  Iroquefe 
Country,  and  atchieve  fome  glorious  feats  among  'em.  In  the 
mean  time,  to  carry  on  his  defign  the  more  cautioufly,  he 
thought  it  proper  to  pafs  by  the  way  of  Fort  Frontenac,  where 


to  iVor^y^- America.  221 

he  might  receive  fome  intelligence.     Upon  his  arrival  at  this 
Fort,   the   Governour  told   him   that  Mr.   de  Denonville  was 
negotiating  a  Peace  with  the  five  Iroquefe  Nations,  whofe  Em- 
baffadors  and  Hoftages  he  expeded  in  a  (hort  time,  in  order 
to  conclude  and  ratifie  the  Peace,  he  having  orders  to  condud 
'em  to  Monreal:  And   that   upon  that  Confideration,  'twas 
moft  proper  for  him  and  his  Warriours  to  return  home,  and 
to  pafs  no  further.     The  Savage  General  was  mightily  fur- 
pris'd  with  this  unexpeded  piece  of  News ;  efpecially  confid- 
ering  that   by  the  means  of  that  Peace,  he  and  his  Nation 
would   be   given  up  as  a  Sacrifice   for  the  Wellfare  of  the 
French.     When  the  Governor  had  made  an  end  of  his  Re- 
monftrance,  the  Rat  acknowledg'd,  that  what  he  ofl^er'd  was 
very   reafonable,    but   withal,    that   inftead   of   following   his 
Advice,  he  would  go  and  tarry  for  the  Iroquefe  Embaffadours 
and  Hoftages  at  the  Catarads,  by  which  they  were  oblig'd  to 
pafs.     He  had  not  tarry'd  there  above  five  or  fix  days,  before 
the  unhappy  Deputies  [146]  arriv'd  with  a  Train  of  forty 
young  Men,  who  were  all  either  kill'd  or  taken  as  they  difem- 
barqued.      The  Prifoners  were  no  fooner  fetter'd,  than  this 
crafty   General  of  the  Hurons  reprefented   to   'em,  that  the 
French  Governour  had  fent  him  notice  to  take  up  that  Poft, 
in  order  to  lie  in  wait   for  a  Party  of  fifty  Warriours,  that 
were  to  pafs  that  way  at  a  certain  fet  time.    The  Iroquefe  being 
much  furpris'd  with  the  apprehenfion  of  the  perfidioufnefs 
that  he  charg'd  upon  Mr.  de  Denonville,  acquainted  the  Rat 
with  the  defign  upon  which  they  came.     Upon  that  the  Rat 
counterfeited  a  fort  of  Rage  and  Fury ;  and  to  play  his  Cards 


222  Some  New  Voyages 

the  better,  flew  out  in  invedives  againft  Mr.  de  Denonville^ 
declaring,  that  fome  time  or  other  he  would  be  reveng'd  upon 
that  Governour,  for  making  him  the  Inftrument  of  the  moft 
barbarous  Treachery  that  ever  was  a6led.  Then  he  fix'd  his 
Eyes  upon  all  the  Prifoners,  among  whom  was  the  chief  Em- 
baffadour  call'd  Theganeforens,^  and  fpoke  to  this  purpofe ;  Go 
my  Brethren,  though  I  am  at  PFar  with  you,  yet  I  releafe  you,  and 
allow  you  to  go  home.  'Tis  the  Governour  of  the  French  that  put 
me  upon  this  black  AElion,  which  I  /hall  never  be  able  to  digeft, 
unlefs  your  five  Nations  revenge  themfelves,  and  make  their  juft 
Reprifals.  This  was  fufRcient  to  convince  the  Iroquefe  of  the 
fmcerity  of  his  words ;  and  they  affur'd  him  upon  the  fpot, 
that  if  he  had  a  mind  to  make  a  feparate  Peace,  the  five 
Nations  would  agree  to  it:  However,  the  Rat  having  loft 
one  Man  in  this  Adventure,  kept  an  Iroquefe  Slave  to  fupply 
the  place  of  the  Man  he  had  loft:  And  after  furnifhing  the 
Prifoners  with  Guns,  Powder,  and  Ball,  in  order  to  their 
return  homeward,  march'd  to  Miffilimakinac,  where  he  pre- 
fented  the  French  Governour  with  the  Slave  that  he  brought 
off.  The  poor  wretch  was  no  fooner  dehver'd,  than  he  was 
condemn'd  to  be  ftiot ;  for  at  that  time  the  French  Garrifon 
did  not  know  that  [147]  Mr,  de  Denonville  defign'd  to  clap  up 
a  Peace  with  the  Iroquefe.     The  condemn'd  Prifoner  gave  an 

1  Teganissoren  (Dekanissore)  was  a  famous  Onondaga  chief  who  for  many  years 
took  a  prominent  part  in  the  councils  of  the  Iroquois,  and  in  the  French  and  English 
wars.  Being  much  attached  to  Frontenac,  during  his  rule  he  was  regarded  by  the 
English  as  a  French  spy.  Later,  he  became  attached  to  the  English;  but  in  171 1 
notified  Vaudreuil  of  an  intended  British  attack.  For  his  negotiations  with  the  two 
powers,  see  A'^.  Y.  Colon.  Docs.,  index.  — Ed. 


to  iVor^Z'- America.  223 

account  of  his  Adventure,  and  that  of  the  Ambaffadours ; 
but  the  French  thought  that  the  fear  of  Death  made  the  fellow 
talk  idly,  and  were  confirm'd  in  that  thought,  by  hearing  the 
Rat  and  his  Men  fay  that  he  was  Light-headed :  Infomuch, 
that  the  poor  Fellow  was  put  to  death,  notwithftanding  all 
the  reafons  he  could  offer.  The  fame  day  that  he  was  fhot, 
the  Rat  call'd  an  old  Iroqueje  Slave  that  had  ferv'd  him  a  long 
while,  and  told  him  he  had  refolv'd  to  allow  him  the  liberty 
of  returning  to  his  own  Country,  and  fpending  the  refl  of  his 
days  among  his  Friends  and  Country-men.  At  the  fame  time 
he  gave  him  to  know,  that  fince  he  had  been  an  Eye-witnefs  of 
the  barbarous  ufage  that  his  Countrymen  had  met  with  from 
the  French,  notwithftanding  what  he  offer'd  in  his  own  defence, 
it  behov'd  him  to  acquaint  his  Countrymen  with  the  blacknefs 
of  that  A6tIon.  The  manumitted  Slave  obey'd  his  orders  fo 
pundually,  that  foon  after  the  Iroqueje  made  an  Incurfion,  at  a 
time  when  the  Governour  did  not  dream  of  any  fuch  thing, 
for  he  had  us'd  the  Precaution  of  giving  the  Iroqueje  to  under- 
ftand,  that  he  difailow'd  of  the  Rat's  Treachery ;  Infomuch, 
that  he  had  a  mind  to  have  him  hang'd ;  and  upon  this  prof- 
pe6l,  expedled  hourly  ten  or  twelve  Deputies  to  conclude  the 
Peace  he  fo  much  defir'd.^ 

In  effedt  the  Deputies  did  come,  but  neither  their  Number 
nor  their   Defign  v/as   fuitable  to  what   the   Governour  had 


^Parkman,  after  careful  comparison  with  other  original  documents  bearing  on 
this  story  of  the  Rat's  treachery,  accepts  the  account  of  Lahontan  as  substantially  cor- 
rect. He  thinks  the  weight  of  evidence,  however,  would  place  the  site  of  the  ambus- 
cade at  La  Famine,  rather  than  the  Cascades  of  the  St.  Lawrence.  See  Frontenac, 
p.  176,  note.  —  Ed. 


224  Some  New  Voyages 

promifed  to  himfelf.  Twelve  hundred  Warriours  landed  at 
the  Lands-end  of  the  Ifland  of  Monreal^  and  burnt  and  fack'd 
all  the  Plantations  in  that  Quarter:  They  maffacred  Men, 
Women,  and  Children ;  and  Madam  de  Denonville,  who  was 
then  at  Monreal  with  her  Husband,  did  not  think  her  felf  fafe 
in  that  place.  A  general  Confternation  was  fpread  all  about; 
for  the  Barbarians  were  not  above  [148]  three  Leagues  from 
MonreaL  They  burnt  all  the  adjacent  Settlements,  and  block'd 
up  two  Forts. ^  Mr.  de  Denonville  fent  out  a  Detachment  of 
a  hundred  Soldiers  and  fifty  Savages  to  oppofe  'em,  being 
unwilling  to  fpare  a  greater  number  out  of  the  City :  but  all 
the  Men  of  the  Detachment  were  either  taken  or  cut  in  pieces, 
excepting  twelve  Savages,  one  Soldier,  and  Mr.  de  Longueil 
who  commanded  the  Party,  and  was  carried  oflF  by  the  twelve 
Savages  after  his  Thigh  was  broke  :  The  other  Officers,  namely, 
the  Sieurs  de  la  Raberre,  Denis,  la  Plante,  and  Filledene,  were  all 
taken  Prifoners.^     In  a  word,  the  Barbarians  laid  almoft  the 


^  Lahontan  must  have  been  in  Montreal  at  the  time  of  this  massacre  at  Lachine, 
which  occurred  August  5,  1689,  and  was  the  most  appalling  in  the  history  of  New 
France.  There  are  several  other  reports  of  eye-witnesses,  which  correspond  in  the 
main  to  this  account.  The  two  forts  were  block-houses  known  as  Forts  Rolland  and 
Remy.  For  a  detailed  account,  with  full  list  of  the  victims,  see  Girouard,  Lake  St. 
Louis,  pp.  117-139.  —  Ed. 

2  Charles  Le  Moyne,  first  baron  de  Longueuil,  later  governor  of  New  France 
(1725-26),  was  eldest  son  of  Charles,  seigneur  de  Longueuil,  for  whom  seep.  74,  note  i, 
ante.  Longueuil  distinguished  himself  in  the  Iroquois  wars,  was  for  many  years  gov- 
ernor of  Montreal,  and  one  of  the  most  distinguished  Canadians.     He  died  in  1729. 

Of  the  other  officers,  all  were  finally  rescued  from  the  Iroquois,  except  Lieutenant 
de  la  Rabeyre,  who  was  burned  at  the  stake.  La  Plante  did  not  return  to  the  colony 
until  1692.  After  his  release,  Etienne  de  Villedonne  led  troops  against  the  Mohawk 
(1692-93},  and  distinguished  himself  in  Acadia  (1705).     He  died  in  1726.  —  Ed. 


to  7Vor^/6-America.  225 

whole  Ifland  wafte,  and  loft  only  three  Men,  who  having  drank 
to  excefs  of  the  Wine  they  found  in  the  Plantations,  were 
decoy'd  into  a  Fort  by  a  Canadefe  Cow-keeper,  that  had  been 
their  Slave  for  fome  Years.  As  foon  as  the  three  unfortunate 
Iroquefe  arriv'd  in  the  Fort,  they  were  thrown  into  a  Cellar  to 
fleep  themfelves  fober  ;  and,  queftionlefs,  as  foon  as  they  wak'd 
they  repented  of  their  excefTive  drinking.  When  they  wak'd, 
they  fell  immediately  a  finging  ;  and  when  the  Garrifon  offer'd 
to  fetter  'em,  and  carry  'em  to  Monreal^  they  flew  to  fome 
Clubs  that  lay  in  the  Cellar,  and  made  fuch  a  vigorous  and 
brave  defence,  that  the  Garrifon  was  forc'd  to  fhoot  'em  upon 
the  fpot.  The  Cow-keeper  being  brought  before  Mr.  de 
Denonville,  he  told  him.  That  the  Breach  made  by  the  Rat^s 
Contrivance  was  irreparable ;  that  the  five  Iroquefe  Nations 
refented  that  Adventure  with  fo  much  warmth,  that  'twas 
impofTible  to  difpofe  'em  to  a  Peace  in  a  fhort  time ;  that  they 
were  fo  far  from  being  angry  with  that  Huron  for  what  he 
did,  that  they  were  willing  to  enter  into  a  Treaty  with  him, 
owning  that  he  and  his  Party  had  done  nothing  but  what 
became  a  brave  Man  and  a  good  Ally.  Doubtlefs  this  fatal 
Incurfion  was  a  great  Surprifal  to  Mr.  de  Denonville,  and 
afforded  him  a  copious  Field  for  Refledion.  'Twas  already 
impofTible  [149]  to  continue  the  PoffefTion  of  Fort  Frontenac^ 
where  they  began  to  want  Provifions,  and  which  could  not  be 
relieved  without  expofing  a  great  many  Men  to  the  danger 
of  the  Paffes  or  Cataradls,  which  I  have  mention'd  fo  often. 
There  was  a  downright  neceflity  of  calling  out  the  Garrifon, 

16 


226  Some  New  Voyages 

and  blowing  up  the  Fort ;  but  the  difficulty  lay  in  finding  a 
Man  to  carry  Orders  for  that  efifed  to  the  Governour,  for  no 
body  durft  undertake  it,  till  the  ^i^xxr  Peter  d'Arpentigni  offer'd 
to  go  all  alone  through  the  Forefts ;  and  accordingly  he  went, 
and  did  his  Bufinefs  fuccefsfully.  The  Orders  were  extream 
welcome  to  Mr.  de  Valrenes,  the  Governour  of  the  Fort  for 
the  time ;  who,  upon  the  receiving  of  'em,  run  a  Mine  under 
the  four  Baftions,  which,  with  the  Powder  he  put  in,  was 
reckon'd  fufficient  to  blow  it  up.^  This  done,  he  embark'd, 
and  came  down  the  River  through  the  Catarads  to  Monreal, 
where  he  found  Mr.  de  Denonville,  and  accompany'd  him 
hither.  That  Officer  did  not  only  abdicate  the  Fort  of  Fron- 
tenac,  but  fet  fire  to  three  great  Barques  that  they  us'd  to  ply 
with  upon  the  Lake,  both  to  awe  the  Iroquefe  in  time  of  War, 
and  to  convey  Commodities  to  'em  in  time  of  Peace.  Mr.  de 
Denonmlle  aded  a  prudent  part  in  relinquifhing  both  this  Fort 
and  that  of  Niagara  ;  for,  in  earneft  thefe  two  Pofts  are  inde- 
fenfible,  by  reafon  of  the  inacceffible  Catarads,  upon  which 
an  Ambufcado  of  ten  Iroquefe  may  repulfe  a  thoufand  French- 
men by  the  throwing  of  Stones.  But  after  all  I  muft  own,  that 
the  Welfare  and  Prefervation  of  our  Colonies  had  an  abfolute 
dependance  upon  thefe  two  Forts,  which  feem'd  to  infure  the 
utter  Deftrudion  of  the  Iroquefe;   for  they  could  not  ftir  out 


1  Philippe  Clement  Duvault,  sieur  de  Valrennes,  was  already  a  veteran  officer 
when  he  arrived  in  Canada  in  1685.  In  that  year,  he  led  one  division  of  La  Barre's 
forces,  and  performed  prodigies  of  valor  in  the  relief  of  La  Prairie  de  la  Madeleine 
(1691) ,  for  which  he  received  high  praise  from  Frontenac.  See  N.  Y.  Colon.  Docs., 
ix,  pp.  522,  523.  —  Ed. 


to  North- A.m^nc2i.  227 

of  their  Villages  to  Hunt,  or  to  Fifh,  without  running  the 
rifque  of  having  their  Throats  cut  by  the  Savages  in  Alliance 
with  us,  who  being  then  affur'd  of  a  fafe  Retreat,  would  have 
made  continual  Incurfions  into  the  Country  of  thofe  Bar- 
barians: [150]  And  by  this  means  the  Iroquefe  being  unpro- 
vided with  Beaver-skins  to  be  given  in  exchange  for  Guns, 
Powder,  Ball,  and  Nets,  would  be  fbarv'd  to  death,  or  at  leaft 
be  oblig'd  to  depart  their  Country. 

In  the  end  of  September  Mr.  de  Bonaventiire^  Captain  and 
Owner  of  a  Merchant  Ship,  arriv'd  in  this  Port,  and  brought 
the  News  of  Mr.  de  Frontenac's  Reinftallment  in  the  place 
of  Governour-General  of  Canada,^  and  of  the  Re-calling  of 
Mr.  de  Denonville,  whom  the  Duke  de  Beauvilliers  has  recom- 
mended to  the  King,  for  the  place  of  Sub-Governour  to  the 
Princes  his  Grandfons.^  Some  People  are  uneafie  at  the 
re-calling  of  this  Governour;  and  'tis  faid,  that  the  Rever- 
end Fathers  the  Jefuits,  fall  under  the  number  of  the  Male- 
contents  :  For  if  we  may  credit  the  reports  of  the  Country, 
they  contributed  in  a  great  meafure,  to  the  re-calling  of  Mr, 
de  Frontenac  feven  or  eight  years  agoe,  by  adling  in  concert 


^  Claude  Denis,  sieur  de  Bonaventure,  belonged  to  one  of  the  oldest  Canadian 
families,  and  afterwards  rose  to  the  rank  of  admiral  in  the  navy.  In  1691  he  co- 
operated in  driving  the  English  from  Acadia,  and  v?as  aid  to  Iberville  in  the  latter's 
expeditions.  —  Ed. 

2  Paul,  Duke  de  Beauvilliers,  was  one  of  the  noted  figures  of  the  court  of  Louis 
XIV,  and  famous  for  his  probity  and  piety.  For  many  years  he  had  served  as  first 
gentleman  of  the  bedchamber  and  chief  of  the  council  of  finance,  and  in  1670  was 
chosen  governor  of  the  royal  princes.  He  died  in  1714,  on  which  occasion  St.  Simon 
drew  the  remarkable  portrait  of  him  which  appears  in  his  Memoirs.  —  Ed. 


228  Some  New  Voyages 

with  the  Intendant  of  Cbefneau,  and  the  fupreme  Council, 
and  drawing  up  Accufations  againft  him  which  had  the  de- 
fired  eflFed;  though  now  the  King  fhews  that  he  is  unde- 
ceiv'd,  by  reinftating  that  Gentleman  once  more  in  this  Gov- 
ernment.^ In  the  mean  time  the  Statefmen  of  the  Country 
that  are  moft  guilty,  know  not  how  to  drefs  this  kettle  of 
Fifh ;  for  they  make  no  queftion  but  the  New  Governour  will 
retain  a  juft  refentment  of  what's  pad.  But  the  Gentlemen, 
Merchants,  and  other  Inhabitants,  are  making  preparations 
for  folemnifing  his  Arrival,  which  they  expedl  with  as  much 
impatience,  as  the  Jews  do  the  Mejfias.  The  very  Savages 
that  live  in  the  skirts  of  the  Colony,  fhew  an  uncommon  Joy 
upon  the  hopes  of  his  return:  And  indeed,  we  need  not  think 
it  ftrange,  for  that  Governour  drew  Efteem  and  Veneration, 
not  only  from  the  French^  but  from  all  the  Nations  of  this  vaft 
Continent,  who  look'd  upon  him  as  their  Guardian  Angel, 
Mr.  de  Denonville  begins  to  pack  up  his  Baggage,  and  that  in 
effedt,  [151]  is  all  I  can  fay  of  him.  'Tis  none  of  my  bufinefs 
to  meddle  with  an  infinity  of  Affairs,  that  relate  to  the  Gentle- 
man's private  Intereft.  As  to  the  queftion,  whether  he  has 
manag'd  well  or  ill,  during  the  courfe  of  his  Government,  or 
whether  he  was  lov'd  or  hated,  I  know  nothing  of  the  matter. 


^Jacques  Duchesneau,  sieur  de  la  Doussiniere,  was  chosen  (1675)  successor 
of  Talon  in  the  Canadian  intendancy.  Almost  from  the  first  he  maligned  Count 
Frontenac,  and  supported  the  Jesuit  party  in  opposition.  The  king,  losing  patience 
at  their  complaints,  recalled  both  Frontenac  and  Duchesneau  May  10,  1682.  In 
the  crisis  of  affairs  in  New  France,  Frontenac  was  sent  back  (1689)  as  the  one  man 
capable  of  meeting  the  difficulties.  — Ed. 


to  North- Avci^vicdi,  229 

I  am  at  a  lofs  to  know  whether  he  kept  a  good  or  a  forry 
Table,  for  indeed  I  was  never  at  It.     Adieu. 

I  make  account  to  fet  out  for  Rochel,  when  the  Veffel  that 
brings  our  new  Governour,  returns  for  France.     I  am, 

SIR, 

Yours,  &c. 


230  Some  New  Voyages 


LETTER    XVIII. 

Dated  at  Quebec  November  15.  1689. 

Givbig  an  Account  of  Mr.  de  Frontenac'j  Arrival^  his  Reception^ 
his  Voyage  to  Monreal,  and  the  repairing  of  Fort  Frontenac. 

SIR, 

THE  Intelligence  you  give  me  of  the  adjudging  of  the 
Lands  of  Lahontan,  would  have  drove  me  to  defpair ;  if 
you  had  not  affur'd  me  at  the  fame  time,  that  I  might  recover 
it  after  a  Century  of  years,  (if  I  had  the  misfortune  to  live  fo 
long)  upon  the  condition  of  reimburfing  to  the  Poffeffour, 
the  Sum  that  he  pay'd  for  it,  and  of  proving  that  I  was 
adlually  in  the  Kings  Service  in  the  remote  parts  of  the 
World,  when  that  Eftate  was  fold.  To  fpeak  to  the  purpofe, 
Mr.  de  Frontenac  has  [152]  countermanded  the  leave  I  had  to 
go  for  France,  and  has  ofiFer'd  me  a  free  accefs  to  his  Pocket 
and  his  Table.  All  the  Arguments  I  offer'd,  have  no  Influence 
upon  him,  and  fo  I  am  bound  to  obey. 

This  new  Governour  arriv'd  at  Quebec  the  i^th  of  O^ober. 
He  came  on  fhoar  at  eight  a  Clock  at  Night,  and  was  receiv'd 
by  the  Supreme  Council,  and  all  the  Inhabitants  in  Arms, 
with  Flambeau's  both  in  the  City,  and  upon  the  Harbour, 
with  a  triple  Difcharge  of  the  great  and  fmall  Guns,  and 
Illuminations  in  all  the  Windows  of  the  City.     That  fame 


to  North-hxntnc^..  231 

Night  he  was  complimented  by  all  the  Companies  of  the 
Town,  and  above  all,  by  the  Jefuits,  who  upon  that  occafion 
made  a  very  pathetick  Speech,  though  the  Heart  had  lefs 
hand  in  it,  than  the  Mouth.  The  next  day  he  was  vifited  by 
all  the  Ladies,  whofe  inward  joy  appear'd  in  their  Counte- 
nances, as  much  as  in  their  Words.  Several  Perfons  made  Fire- 
works, while  the  Governour  and  his  Retinue  fung  Te  Deum  in 
the  great  Church.  Thefe  folemn  Demonftrations  of  Joy, 
increas'd  from  day  to  day,  till  the  new  Governour  fet  out  for 
Monreal;  and  the  Condu(5l  of  the  People  upon  this  Head, 
afforded  fignal  proofs  of  the  fatisfadlion  they  had  in  his  re- 
turn, and  of  their  refling  affur'd,  that  his  wife  Condudl,  and 
noble  Spirit,  would  preferve  the  Repofe  and  Tranquility  that 
he  always  kept  up,  during  his  firft  ten  years  Government.  All 
the  World  ador'd  him,  and  ftyl'd  him  Redemptor  Patriae ;  to 
which  Title  he  had  a  juft  claim,  for  all  the  Inhabitants  of  thefe 
Colonies  agree,  that  when  he  came  firft  to  Canada^  he  found 
all  things  in  Confufion  and  Diftrefs.  At  that  time  the  Iroquefe 
had  burnt  all  the  Plantations,  and  cut  the  Throats  of  fome 
thoufands  of  the  French ;  the  Farmer  was  knock'd  on  the 
Head  in  his  Field ;  the  Traveller  was  murder'd  upon  the 
Road,  and  the  Merchant  ruin'd  for  want  of  Commerce :  All 
the  Planters  were  pinch'd  with  Famine,  [153]  the  War  ren- 
der'd  the  Country  defolate ;  and  in  a  word,  New-France  had 
infallibly  perifh'd,  if  this  Governour  had  not  made  that  Peace 
with  the  Barbarians,  that  I  fpoke  of  in  my  fifth  Letter.  The 
bringing  of  that  Peace  to  bear,  was  an  adlion  of  greater 
Importance,  than  you  can  well  imagine ;  for  thefe  Barbarians 


232  Some  New  Voyages 

grounded  all  their  Wars  upon  a  perfonal  Enmity,  whereas  the 
European  Ruptures  depend  more  upon  Intereft  than  upon 
pure  Revenge. 

Mr.  de  St.  Falters  the  Bifnop  of  Quebec,  arriv'd  likewife  on 
the  15//J  at  the  fame  Port.  He  had  imbarqu'd  in  the  preced- 
ing Spring,  on  board  of  a  Bark  that  he  had  hir'd  to  tranfport 
him  to  Acadia,  to  Newfound-land,  and  to  the  other  Countries 
of  his  Diocefe.  Mr.  de  Frontenac  our  Governour,  fet  out  for 
Monreal  in  a  Canow,  four  or  five  days  after  his  Arrival;  and 
I  had  the  honour  to  accompany  him.  All  Indeavours  were 
us'd  to  diffwade  him  from  undertaking  that  Voyage,  when  the 
feafon  was  fo  cold,  and  fo  far  advanc'd :  For,  as  I  inform'd 
you  before,  the  Ice  is  thicker  and  ftronger  here  in  O^ob.  than 
'tis  at  Paris  in  January;  which,  is  very  ftrange.  Notwith- 
ftanding  all  the  Remonftrances  drawn  from  the  Hardfhips  and 
Inconveniences  of  the  Voyage,  he  flighted  the  Fatigues  of  the 
Water,  and  threw  himfelf  into  a  Canow  in  the  fixty  eighth 
year  of  his  Age.  Nay,  he  took  the  abdication  of  Fort  Fron- 
tenac fo  much  to  Heart,  that  he  had  gone  ftraight  thither,  if 
the  Nobility,  the  Priefts,  and  the  Inhabitants  of  Monreal,  had 
not  intreated  him  with  joynt  Supplications,  not  to  expofe  his 
Perfon  to  the  danger  of  the  Falls  and  Cataradls  that  lie  in 
that  Paffage.  In  the  mean  time  fome  Gentlemen  of  Canada, 
follow'd  by  a  hundred  Coureurs  de  Bois,  under  the  command  of 
Mr.  Mantel,  ventur'd  upon  the  Voyage,  with  intent  to  learn 
the  State  of  the  Fort.  I  acquainted  you  in  my  laft  Letter, 
that  Mr.  de  Valrenes  had  blown  up  the  Walls  of  the  Fort,  when 
[154]  he  made  his  Retreat ;  but  by  good  luck,  the  damage  was 


to  iVor^/i- America.  233 

not  fo  great  as  'twas  took  to  be ;  for  the  Party  commanded 
by  Mr.  Mantet,  have  already  rear'd  up  the  ruinous  Wall  to 
the  height  of  fome  Fathoms,  and  will  continue  to  work  upon 
the  repair  of  the  Fort  all  this  Winter.^  This  News  Mr.  de 
Frontenac  receiv'd  laft  Night,  which  was  the  fixth  after  his 
return  to  this  City. 

I  had  forgot  to  tell  you  that  he  brought  with  him  out 
of  France^  fome  of  thofe  Iroquefe  that  Mr.  de  Denonville  had 
fent  to  the  Galleys,  as  I  intimated  in  my  thirteenth  Letter ; 
the  reft  having  perifh'd  in  their  Chains.  Of  all  thefe  unfor- 
tunate Barbarians  that  he  has  brought  back,  the  moft  con- 
fiderable  is  one  that  goes  by  the  name  of  Oreouahe.  He  was 
not  us'd  as  a  Galley  Slave,  in  regard  that  he  was  the  Leader 
of  the  Goyoguaus^  and  the  Governour  has  lodg'd  him  in  the 
Caftle,  in  confideration  of  the  efteem  he  fhews  both  for  Mr. 
de  Frontenac^  and  for  the  French  Nation.  Some  flatter  them- 
felves  with  the  hopes,  that  fome  Accommodation  with  the  five 
Iroquefe  Nations  may  be  effedled  by  his  Mediation ;  and  for 
that  end  propofals  of  Peace  are  now  in  agitation :  But  I  have 
three  good  reafons  for  prediding,  that  fuch  a  Defign  will 
prove  abortive.^    I  have  already  laid  thefe  Reafons  before  Mr. 


1  Nicholas  d'Ailleboust,  sieur  de  Mantet  (Mantz,  Manteht) ,  belonged  to  a  prom- 
inent Canadian  family,  being  grandson  of  one  of  the  founders  of  Montreal.  Like 
other  promising  young  men  he  took  to  wood-ranging ;  becoming  an  associate  of 
DuLuth,  he  acquired  much  influence  with  the  Indians  of  the  Northwest.  Frontenac 
employed  him  upon  raiding  parties,  and  he  was  first  to  enter  Schenectady  (1690). 
His  latter  years  were  spent  in  trading  in  the  upper  country,  where  he  is  last  mentioned 
in  1709.  —  Ed. 

^Oureahe  (Ourehaoue)  was  a  Cayuga  war  chief,  who  had  been  sent  to  France 
through  Denonville's  treachery.     Frontenac  had  won  his  good  will  on  the  return 


234  Some  New  Voyages 

de  FrontenaCy  who  gave  me  to  know,  that  after  the  departure 
of  the  Ships,  he  would  difcourfe  me  upon  that  Head.  I  fhall 
not  offer  at  the  particulars  of  his  Interview,  with  Monfieur 
and  Madam  de  Denonville ;  till  fuch  time  as  you  and  I  have 
an  opportunity  of  talking  under  the  Rofe.  Some  Officers 
accompany  Mr.  Denonville  and  his  Lady  to  France^  in  hopes 
of  being  prefer'd.  In  all  probability  the  Ships  will  fet  fail  to 
Morrow,  for  we  have  now  a  fair  and  gentle  Wefterly  Gale  ; 
befides,  that  the  feafon  for  quitting  this  Port,  is  almoft  fpent. 

I  am, 

SI R^       Tours,  &c. 


voyage,  and  employed  him  in  negotiations  with  the  Iroquois.  On  the  ill-success  of 
these  first  efforts  see  Parkman,  Frontenac,  pp.,  194-207.  The  chief,  however, 
continued  to  serve  the  French,  and  was  rewarded  with  the  pay  of  a  captain  until  his 
death  in  the  early  eighteenth  century.  —  Ed. 


to  iVor^/6- America.  235 


[155]       LETTER    XIX. 

Dated  at  Monreal  October  2.  1690. 

Relating  the  Attempts  upon  A^^w-England  and  New-York;  a 
fatal  Embajfy  fent  by  the  French  to  the  Iroquefe  ;  and  an  ill- 
concerted  Interprife  of  the  Englifh  and  the  Iroquefe,  in  march- 
ing by  Land  to  Attack  the  French  Colony. 

SIR, 

ABOUT  fifteen  days  fince  a  Ship  of  Rochel  laden  with  Wine 
and  Brandy,  arriv'd  in  this  Harbour;  and  the  Captain 
took  care  to  convey  a  Letter  from  you  to  my  Hands.  As  to 
your  defire  of  having  a  circumflantial  Account  of  the  Trade 
of  Canada,  I  cannot  fatisfie  it  at  prefent,  for  I  am  not  as  yet 
fo  thoroughly  acquainted  with  all  its  Branches.  But  I  affure 
you,  that  fome  time  or  other  I  fhall  fend  you  fuch  Memoirs, 
as  will  give  you  fatisfadlion  upon  that  Head.  In  the  mean 
time,  I  hope  you'll  be  contented  with  an  account  of  what 
pafs'd  in  this  Country  fince  the  date  of  my  laft. 

As  foon  as  Mr.  Denonville  fet  out  from  Quebec,  upon  his 
return  to  France,  Mr.  de  Frontenac  took  poffefHon  of  the 
Fort,  which  is  the  common  Refidence  of  our  Governour- 
General ;  and  order'd  one  of  our  beft  Archite6ls  to  make 
preparations  for  rebuilding  it  as  foon  as  he  could. 

In  the  beginning  of  this  year,  Mr.  d'Iberville  attempted  to 


236  Some  New  Voyages 

pillage  a  fmall  Village  in  New-ror^,  call'd  by  the  Iroquefe 
Corlar;  which  name  they  likewife  give  to  all  the  Governours 
of  that  EngUfli  Colony.  [156]  This  Gentleman,  who  is  a 
Canadefe,  was  attended  by  five  hundred  Coureiirs  de  Bois,  and 
the  like  number  of  Savages ;  and  the  whole  Party  made  the 
Expedition  over  Snow  and  Ice,  notwithftanding  they  had  three 
hundred  Leagues  to  march  backward  and  forward,  and  that 
the  Roads  were  very  rugged  and  troublefome.  Mr.  d'Iberville 
met  with  wonderful  Succefs,  for  after  he  had  pillag'd,  burnt, 
and  fack'd  that  little  Village,  with  the  adjacent  Cantons,  he 
fell  in  with  a  Party  of  an  hundred  Iroquefe,  and  defeated  'em 
intirely.^  Much  about  the  fame  time  Mr.  dePortneiif,  another 
Canada  Gentleman,  march'd  out  at  the  Head  of  three  hundred 
Men,  one  half  Savages,  and  the  other  half  Coureiirs  de  Bois,  with 
intent  to  poffefs  himself  of  a  Fort  belonging  to  the  Engli/h, 
call'd  Kenebeki,  which  ftands  upon  the  Sea-Coaft  of  New- 
England,  towards  the  Frontiers  of  Acadia.  The  Garrifon  of 
this  Fort  made  a  brave  defence :  But  there  being  great  quan- 
tities of  Granado's  and  other  Fire-works  thrown  in  upon  'em, 

1  St.  Helene  and  Mantetwere  the  leaders  of  this  expedition,  which  numbered  only 
about  two  hundred  men,  not  a  thousand.  Iberville  was  one  of  the  officers.  See 
N.  Y.  Colon.  Docs.,  ix,  pp.  466-469.  The  Iroquois  party  who  pursued  the  victors 
were  not  routed,  but  defeated  the  rear  of  the  French  forces. 

Pierre  Le  Moyne,  sieur  d'Iberville,  was  one  of  the  most  remarkable  of  early 
Canadians,  and  has  been  called  "  The  Cid  of  Canada."  Born  in  1661,  the  third  son 
of  Charles  le  Moyne,  sieur  de  Longueuil  (see  p.  74,  note  i,  ante),  he  early  joined  the 
French  navy.  His  first  exploits  were  in  Hudson  Bay,  where  he  captured  the  English 
forts  and  vessels.  In  1692  he  served  against  the  English  in  Acadia  and  Newfound- 
land. After  the  Peace  of  Ryswick  (1697)  he  turned  his  attention  to  the  Mississippi, 
and  led  the  expedition  which  founded  Louisiana  (1699).  He  attacked  the  English 
fleet  in  the  West  Indies  (1706),  dying  in  July  of  the  same  year  at  Havana.  — Ed, 


to  North' h.vci^nc2i,  237 

while  the  Savages  (contrary  to  their  Cuftom)  fcal'd  the  Palif- 
fadoes  on  all  hands,  the  Governour  was  oblig'd  to  furrender 
upon  Difcretion.  'Tis  faid,  that  in  this  Action  the  Coureurs 
de  Boh  did  their  duty  very  bravely,  but  the  Enterprife  had 
prov'd  fuccefslefs  without  the  affiftance  of  the  Savages.^ 

As  foon  as  the  Rivers  were  navigable,  Mr.  de  Frontenac 
offer'd  to  fend  me  with  Propofals  of  Peace  to  the  Iroquefe. 
But  I  made  anfwer,  that  fince  his  Pocket  and  his  Table  had 
been  free  to  me  during  the  Winter,  I  could  not  imagine  that 
he  had  a  mind  to  be  rid  of  me  fo  foon.  Being  oblig'd  by  this 
reply  to  unfold  my  meaning,  I  remonftrated  to  him.  That,  the 
King  of  England  having  loft  his  Crown,  and  War  being  pro- 
claim'd,  the  Governours  of  New-England  and  l^ew-Tork,  would 
infallibly  ufe  their  utmoft  Efforts  to  excite  thefe  Bandito's  to 
redouble  their  Incurfions  ;  that  for  that  end  they  would  furnifh 
[157]  'em  with  Ammunition  ^r^r/i,  and  even  joyn  'em  in  order 
to  attack  our  Towns;  and  above  all,  that  the  Intrigue  of  the 
Rat  had  fo  provok'd  'em,  that  in  my  opinion,  'twas  impofTible 
to  appeafe  'em.  Upon  thefe  Confiderations,  I  humbly  be- 
feech'd  him  to  have  fome  other  Perfon  in  his  view,  in  cafe  he 


^  The  French  version  of  this  attack  upon  Fort  Loyal,  on  the  present  site  of  Port- 
land, Maine,  is  found  in  A'^.  T.  Colon.  Docs.,  ix,  pp.  472,  473.  Lahontan  has,  as 
usual,  exaggerated  the  number  of  the  attacking  party.  For  the  narrative  of  the  British 
captain,  Sylvanus  Davis,  see  Mass.  Hist.  Colls.,  3d  series,  i,  pp.  101-112. 

Jacques  Robineau,  sieur  de  Portneuf,  belonged  to  the  early  Canadian  noblesse, 
and  was  employed  as  an  officer  in  the  Indian  and  English  wars.  In  1687  he  acted  as 
lieutenant  under  Denonville.  After  this  attack  on  Fort  Loyal,  he  served  in  Acadia, 
where  his  brother  Villebon  was  governor,  and  for  several  years  led  raiding  parties 
against  the  Maine  settlements.  He  died  at  Quebec  in  1715.  The  flag  captured  at 
Fort  Loyal  hung  for  many  years  in  the  basilica  at  Quebec.  —  Ed. 


238  Some  New  Voyages 

perfifted  in  his  defign  of  making  a  Trial  of  that  Nature.^  The 
Chevalier  Do  was  fingled  out  for  this  fatal  Embaffy,  being 
attended  by  one  CoUn^  as  Interpreter  of  the  Iroquefe  Lan- 
guage, and  two  young  Canadans.  They  fet  out  in  a  Canow, 
and  when  they  came  in  fight  of  the  Village  of  the  Onnontagnes^ 
were  receiv'd  with  the  honourable  Salvo  of  feveral  good 
blows,  and  conduced  with  the  fame  Ceremony  to  the  Village. 
Such  a  Retinue  could  not  but  be  difagreeable  to  the  Gentle- 
man that  came  to  make  offers  of  a  Peace.  The  ancient  Men 
being  quickly  affembled,  thought  it  moft  proper  to  fend  'em 
back  with  a  favourable  Anfwer,  and  in  the  mean  time  to 
ingage  fome  of  the  Agnies  and  Onnoyotes^  to  lye  in  wait  for  'em 
at  the  Cataradls  of  the  River,  and  there  kill  two,  fending  the 
third  back  to  Quebec^  and  carrying  the  fourth  to  their  Village, 
where  there  would  be  found  fome  Engli/Ji  that  would  fhoot 
'em,  that  is,  that  would  give  'em  the  fame  ufage  as  the  Rat  did 
to  their  Ambaffadours :  So  true  it  is,  that  that  Adlion  fticks 
in  their  ftomachs.  This  Projedl  had  actually  been  put  in  exe- 
cution, if  it  had  not  been  for  fome  of  the  Planters  of  New- 
Tork,  who  were  then  among  the  Barbarians,  having  come 
thither  on  purpofe  to  animate  'em  againft  us.  Thefe  Plant- 
ers knew  fo  well  how  to  influence  the  Barbarians  that  were 
already  bent  upon  Revenge;  that  a  Company  of  young  Barba- 
rians burnt  'em  all  alive,  excepting  the  Chevalier  Do,  whom 
they  tied  Hand  and  Foot,  and  fent  him  bound  to  Bojlon,  with 
a  defign  to  pump  out  of  him,  a  view  of  the  condition  of  our 


1  The  French  version  indicates  that  Lahontan  had  been  ill,  and  used  his  weakness 
as  a  plea  to  be  excused  from  this  hazardous  embassy.  —  Ed. 


to  North- hn\Qr\c2i.  239 

Colonies  and  Forces.^  This  piece  of  News  [158]  we  receiv'd 
two  Months  after,  by  fome  Slaves  that  made  their  efcape 
from  the  Iroquefe ;  and  Mr.  de  Frontenac^  when  furpris'd  with 
fuch  difmal  News,  declar'd,  that  out  of  twenty  Captains  that 
offer'd  to  execute  that  Commiilion,  and  would  have  taken  the 
Imployment  for  an  Honour,  I  was  the  only  one  that  had  been 
capable  of  forefeeing  its  bad  Succefs. 

June  the  24/^,  I  imbarqu'd  for  this  place  in  a  fluggifh 
Brigantine,  that  the  Captain  of  the  Governour's  Guards  had 
caus'd  to  be  built  the  foregoing  Winter.  This  venerable 
Veffel  had  the  honour  to  lodge  the  Intendant  and  his  Lady  ; 
and  all  of  us  being  in  no  hafte,  fpent  ten  or  twelve  days  by 
the  way,  and  feafted  like  Kings  every  Night.  Mr.  de  Frontenac 
mark'd  out  a  Fort  in  his  paffage  to  the  City  of  Trois  Rivieres^ 
which  I  fpoke  of  before.  Fifteen  days  after  our  arrival  in 
this  place,  a  certain  Savage  whofe  name  was  Plake,  came  and 
gave  us  notice,  that  he  had  difcover'd  a  Body  of  a  thoufand 
Engli/ky  and  five  hundred  Iroquefe  that  march'd  up  to  attack 
us.^     Upon  this  Intelligence,  all  our  Troops  crofs'd  over  to 


^This  account  of  the  embassy  of  Chevalier  Pierre  d'Aux  (Do),  sieur  de  Jolliet, 
is  substantially  correct.  He  was  a  prisoner  both  in  Boston  and  New  York  until 
August,  1692,  when  having  escaped  he  made  his  way  to  Canada  in  time  to  furnish 
Count  Frontenac  with  useful  information  relative  to  the  English  plans.  The  governor 
thereupon  sent  him  to  France  to  give  an  account  of  the  situation  of  Boston  and  New 
York,  "  and  how  easily  they  may  be  taken."  He  returned  to  New  France  the  fol- 
lowing year,  and  then  disappears  from  history.  —  Ed. 

2  La  Plaque,  nephew  of  the  Great  Mohawk  (called  by  the  Dutch,  Kryn) ,  chief  of 
the  praying  Indians  of  Sault  St.  Louis  mission,  was  useful  to  the  French  during 
Frontenac's  War  (1689-97).  After  having  given  notice  of  this  intended  invasion, 
he  set  out  the  following  year  (1691)  to  capture  prisoners  and  secure  information, 
which  undertaking  proved  so  successful  that  he  was  sent  to  France  to  report.     After 


240  Some  New  Voyages 

the  Meadow  of  Madelaine,  oppofite  to  this  City,  and  there 
incamp'd,  in  conjundllon  with  three  or  four  hundred  Savages 
that  were  our  Allies,  in  order  to  give  the  Enemy  a  warm 
Reception.^  Our  Camp  was  no  fooner  form'd,  than  Mr.  de 
Frontenac  detach'd  two  or  three  fmall  Parties  of  the  Savages 
to  obferve  the  Enemy.  Thefe  Parties  came  foon  back,  after 
having  furpris'd  fome  ftragling  Iroquefe  at  hunting  on  the 
Confines  of  Champlaine  Lake :  The  Prifoners  inform'd  us, 
that  the  Engli/h  being  unable  to  encounter  the  fatigues  of  the 
march,  and  unprovided  with  a  fufficient  ftock  of  Provifions, 
both  they  and  the  Iroquefe  were  return'd  to  their  own  Coun- 
try.2  This  account  being  confirm'd  by  other  Savages,  our 
Troops  decamp'd,  and  march'd  back  to  this  place,  from 
whence  I  was  detach'd  [159]  fome  days  after  to  command  a 
Party  that  was  to  cover  the  Reapers  of  Fort  Roland,  which  lies 
in  this  Ifland.^      When  the  Harveft  was  over  I  return'd  to 


his  return  he  continued  to  serve  the  French,  on  two  occasions  (1692,  1693)  leading 
war  parties  nearly  to  the  gates  of  Albany.  — Ed. 

^  La  Prairie  de  la  Madeleine  is  six  miles  above  Montreal,  on  the  opposite  side  of 
the  river.  This  was  supposed  to  be  the  point  at  which  the  expedition  would  emerge, 
coming  by  way  of  Lake  Champlain  and  Richelieu  River.  A  small  division  did  attack 
this  point  after  Frontenac's  return  to  Quebec,  carrying  off  several  prisoners.  —  Ed. 

2  This  was  part  of  the  expedition  fitted  out  by  the  British  colonies  for  the  capture 
of  Canada.  The  troops  of  New  York  and  Connecticut  rendezvoused  at  Wood  Creek, 
on  Lake  Champlain,  under  command  of  General  Winthrop  of  Connecticut ;  but  ill- 
ness, lack  of  provisions,  and  the  lukewarm  attitude  of  their  Iroquois  allies,  made  it 
necessary  to  abandon  the  attack.  See  Winthrop's  "Journal,"  in  N.  Y.  Colon.  Docs., 
iv,  pp.  193-197-  —  Ed. 

3  Fort  Rolland  was  built  (1670)  on  the  site  of  the  present  Lachine,  to  protect  the 
trading  houses  of  Fran9ois  le  Noir,  ciit  Rolland,  who  carried  on  a  large  traffic  with 
the  Western  Indians.  During  Frontenac's  War,  it  was  regularly  garrisoned  by  detach- 
ments of  soldiers.     For  full  details,  see  Girouard,  Lake  St.  Louis,  pp.  70-75.  —  Ed. 


to  iVor^/>- America.  241 

this  place,  along  with  the  Hurons  and  the  Oiitaoiias,  who  had 
come  down  from  their  own  Country,  in  purfuit  of  their  ufual 
Trade  in  Skins,  an  account  of  which  you  had  in  my  eight 
Letter.  Thefe  Traders  continued  here  fifteen  days,  and  then 
march'd  home.^ 

This,  Sir,  is  a  Summary  of  all  our  Occurrences  of  Moment 
fmce  the  laft  year.  About  fifteen  days  hence,  I  think  to  fet 
out  for  Quebec,  in  Mr.  de  Frontenac's  Brigantin.  I  conclude 
with  my  ufual  Complement, 

SIR, 

Yours,  &c. 


^  The  descent  of  the  Northwest  Indians  for  trade  this  year  (1690)  was  an  encour- 
aging circumstance  for  New  France.  See  N.  Y.  Colon.  Docs.,  ix,  pp.  478-490; 
Parkman,  Frontenac,  pp.  252-255.  —  Ed. 


16 


242  Some  New  Voyages 


LETTER    XX. 

Dated  at  Rochel  January  12.  1691. 
Being  a  Relation  of  a  fecond  and  very  important  Expedition  of  the 
Englifh  by  Sea;  in  which  is  contain' d  a  Letter  written  by  the 
Englifh  Admiral  to  the  Count  of  Frontenac,  with  this  Gov- 
ernour's  Verbal  Answer.  As  alfo  an  account  of  the  Authour's 
departure  for  France. 

SIR, 

I  AM  arriv'd  at  laft  at  Rochel,  from  whence  I  now  tranfmit 
you  a  Relation  of  all  that  pafs'd  in  Canada,  fince  the  date 
of  my  laft  Letter.  In  the  fpace  of  a  few  days  after  that  date, 
Mr.  de  Frontenac  receiv'd  advice  that  a  ftrong  Fleet  of  Englifh 
[160]  Ships,  amounting  to  thirty  four  Sail,  was  feen  near 
Tadoiiffac}  Immediately  he  got  on  board  of  his  Brigantine, 
and  order'd  all  the  Troops  to  imbarque  in  Canows  and  Boots, 
and  to  row  Night  and  Day  to  prevent  the  Enemy ;  all  which 
was  happily  put  in  execution.  At  the  fame  time  he  gave 
orders  to  Mr.  de  Callieres,  to  bring  down  as  many  of  the 
Inhabitants  as  pofTibly  he  could.  We  row'd  with  fuch  expedi- 
tion, and  diligence,  that  we  arriv'd  the  3^  day  at  Quebec.    As 


1  The  first  report  of  the  approach  of  the  English  Fleet  reached  Frontenac  through 
an  Abenaki  Indian,  who  had  travelled  overland  with  the  tidings.  The  governor  gave 
this  news  scant  credence  until  ffshing  vessels  announced  the  progress  of  the  fleet  as 
far  up  as  Tadoussac.  For  a  brief  but  succinct  account,  see  Jes.  Rel.,  Ixiv,  pp.  4.1- 
53— Ed. 


to  7Vor^Z>-America.  243 

foon  as  Mr.  de  Frontenac  debarqued,  he  view'd  the  weakeft 
Pofts,  and  order'd  'em  to  be  fortified  without  lofs  of  time : 
He  rais'd  Batteries  in  feveral  places,  and  though  in  that  capital 
City  we  had  but  twelve  great  Guns,  and  but  little  Ammuni- 
tion, yet  he  feem'd  to  be  refolutely  bent  upon  an  obftinate 
Refiftance  to  the  efforts  of  the  Enemy's  Fleet,  which  in  the 
mean  time  ftood  catching  of  Flies,  at  the  diftance  of  two 
Leagues  from  Quebec.  We  took  the  advantage  of  their  flow 
approaches,  and  work'd  incefifantly  to  put  our  felves  in  a 
pofture  of  defence.  Our  Troops,  our  Militia,  and  our  con- 
federate Savages,  came  up  to  us  on  all  hands.  'Tis  certain, 
that  if  the  Englifi  Admiral  had  made  his  Defcent  before  our 
arrival  at  Quebec^  or  even  two  days  after,  he  had  carry'd  the 
place  without  ftriking  a  blow ;  for  at  that  time  there  was  not 
two  hundred  French  in  the  City,  which  lay  open,  and  expos'd 
on  all  hands. ^  But  inftead  of  doing  that,  he  caft  Anchor 
towards  the  point  of  the  Ifland  of  Orleans,  and  loft  three  days 
in  confulting  with  the  Captains  of  the  Ships,  before  they  came 
to  a  Refolution.  He  took  the  Sieur  JoUet  with  his  Lady  and 
his  Mother-in-Laws  in  a  Bark  in  the  River  of  St.  Laurence} 
Three  Merchant-men  from  France,  and  one  laden  with  Beaver- 


1  All  authorities  apparently  agree  with  Lahontan's  judgment,  that  the  capital 
fault  of  the  English  commander  was  his  waste  of  time.  —  Ed. 

2  Lahontan  is  the  only  contemporary  authority  who  includes  JoUiet  himself  in  the 
list  of  prisoners.  Probably  it  was  only  his  wife  and  mother-in-law,  who  were  cap- 
tured on  their  way  to  their  seigniory  of  Anticosti,  with  M.  de  Grandville.  Louis 
Jolliet,  the  famous  explorer,  was  born  in  Quebec  in  1645.  Losing  his  father  at  an 
early  age,  he  was  reared  by  the  Jesuits.  In  1667  he  visited  France,  and  the  following 
year  organized  his  first  trading  and  exploring  expedition  to  the  Great  Lakes,  whither 
he  again  went,  1670-71.      His  success  brought  him  a  commission  to  discover  the 


244  Some  New  Voyages 

Skins  from  Hiidfon  Bay,  enter'd  the  River  of  Saguenay,  by  the 
way  of  Tadouffac,  where  they  fculk'd,  and  after  hauling  their 
Guns  afhoar,  rais'd  very  good  Batteries.  [i6i]  To  be  (hort, 
the  Officers  of  the  Enemy's  Fleet  came  to  a  Refolution  after 
the  lofs  of  three  or  four  days  in  ufelefs  Confultations,  during 
which  time  we  were  joyn'd  on  all  hands  by  great  numbers  of 
Inhabitants  and  Soldiers.  Purfuant  to  the  refolution  of  the 
Councils  of  War,  the  Engli/h  Admiral,  namely,  Sir  TFilliam 
Phips,  fent  out  his  Sloop  with  a  French  Flag  upon  its  Prow, 
which  made  up  to  the  City  with  found  of  Trumpet.^     Upon 

Mississippi,  which  he  accomplished  in  company  with  the  Jesuit  missionary  Marquette 
(1673).  Upon  his  return  in  July,  1674,  JoHiet  lost  all  of  his  papers  by  having  his 
canoe  swamped  in  the  descent  of  Lachlne  Rapids.  The  following  year  he  married 
Claire  Franfoise  Bissot,  who  brought  him  property  on  the  Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence, 
where  in  1679,  he  acquired  Isles  Mingan,  and  Anticosti  a  year  later.  In  the  former 
year,  he  visited  Hudson  Bay,  via  the  Saguenay  and  Lake  St.  John,  and  was  cordially 
received  by  the  English.  Labrador  was  explored  by  him  in  1694,  his  death  occurring 
six  years  later.  For  the  latest  research  concerning  Jolliet,  see  Gagnon,  "Louis 
Jolliet,"  in  La  Rei'ue  Canadienne,  1900-1902. 

Jolliet's  mother-in-law  was  Marie  Couillard,  who  after  the  death  (1675)  o^ 
Bissot,  her  first  husband,  married  Jacques  de  Lalande.  She  was  a  woman  of  much 
force  and  ability,  and  according  to  other  authorities  suggested  to  Phips  the  exchange 
of  prisoners,  and  to  effect  it  went  in  person  to  Frontenac.  She  was  a  sister-in-law  of 
Jean  Nicolet,  the  explorer,  and  one  of  her  sons  was  Sieur  de  Vincennes,  an  officer  of 
note  in  the  Western  country.  — Ed. 

^Sir  William  Phips  was  born  in  Pemaquid  (Bristol),  Maine,  in  1651.  He  was 
the  son  of  a  poor  colonist,  and  tended  sheep  until  he  was  eighteen  years  of  age,  then 
learned  the  trade  of  a  ship  carpenter.  Going  to  Boston,  he  there  married  a  wealthy 
widow,  who  taught  him  to  read  and  write.  On  a  visit  to  England,  he  secured  a 
commission  to  search  for  wrecked  Spanish  treasure-ships  in  the  West  Indies.  After 
one  unsuccessful  attempt  (1684),  he  raised  in  1687  silver  and  plate  amounting  to 
^^300,000.  For  this  service  knighthood  was  conferred  upon  him,  and  he  returned  to 
Massachusetts  to  lead  an  expedition  which  captured  Port  Royal  (May,  1690).  After 
the  failure  of  the  Quebec  investment,  Phips  was  somewhat  discredited,  but  in  1692 
he  was  appointed  governor  of  Massachusetts,  which  office  he  held  until  his  death  in 
London,  in  1695.  —  Ed. 


to  North-hmmc2i.  245 

this,  Mr.  de  Frontenac  fent  out  another  with  a  French  Officer  to 
meet  it,  who  found  an  Englifli  Major  in  the  Sloop,  who  gave 
him  to  underftand,  that  he  had  the  charge  of  a  Letter  from 
his  General,  to  the  Governour  of  Canada^  and  hop'd  he  might 
be  allow'd  to  deliver  it  himfelf.  Upon  that  the  Fj'ench  Officer 
took  him  into  his  Sloop,  and  having  blindfolded  him,  con- 
ducted him  to  the  Governour's  Chamber;  where  his  Face 
being  uncover'd,  he  deliver'd  him  a  Letter,  the  fubftance  of 
which  was  this. 

'  I    Sir  William  Phips,   General   of   the    Forces   of   New- 

^  England,  by  Sea  and  Land,  to  Count  Frontenac,  Governour 

'  General  of   Quebec,   by  Orders   from,   and   in  the  name  of 

'  William  III  and  Mary  King  and  Queen  of  England ;  am  come 

*  to  make  my  felf  Mafter  of  this  Country.     But  in  regard  that 

'  I  have  nothing  fo  much  in  view,  as  the  preventing  of  the 

'  effufion  of  Blood,  I  require  you  to  furrender  at  difcretion, 

'  your  Cities,  Caftles,  Forts,  Towns,  as  well  as  your  Perfons ; 

'  affuring  you  at  the  fame  time,  that  you  fhall  meet  with  all 

'  manner  of  good  Ufage,  Civility  and  Humanity.     If  you  do 

'  not  accept  of  this  Propofal  without  any  Reftridlion,  I  will 

'  indeavour,  by  the  affiftance  of  Heaven,  on  which  I  rely,  and 

'  the  force  of  my  Arms,  to  make  a  Conqueft  of  'em.     I  expedl 

'  a  pofitive  anfwer  in  writing  in  the  fpace  of  an  Hour,  and  in 

'the  mean  time  give  you  notice,  that  after  [162]  the  com- 

'  mencement  of  Hoftilities,  I  fhall  not  entertain  any  thoughts 

'  of  Accommodation. 

Sign'd,  William  Phips. 


246  Some  New  Voyages 

After  the  Interpreter  had  tranflated  the  Letter  to  Mr.  de 
Frontenac,  who  was  then  furrounded  with  Officers ;  he  order'd 
the  Captain  of  his  Guards  to  make  a  Gibbet  before  the  Fort, 
in  order  to  hang  the  poor  Major,  who  in  all  appearance 
underftood  French;  for  upon  the  pronouncing  of  this  fatal 
Sentence,  he  was  like  to  fwoon  away.  And  indeed  I  muft  fay, 
the  Major  had  fome  reafon  to  be  affeded,  for  he  had  certainly 
been  hang'd,  if  the  Bifhop  and  the  Intendant,  who  to  his  good 
luck  were  then  prefent,  had  not  interceded  on  his  behalf. 
Mr.  de  Frontenac  pretended,  that  they  were  a  Fleet  of  Pyrates, 
or  of  Perfons  without  CommifTion,  for  that  the  King  of 
England  was  then  in  France.  But  at  laft  the  Governour  being 
appeas'd,  order'd  the  Major  to  repair  forthwith  on  board  of 
his  Admiral,  againft  whom  he  could  defend  himfelf  the  better, 
for  not  being  attack'd.  At  the  fame  time  he  declar'd,  that 
he  knew  no  other  King  of  Great  Britain^  than  James  II,  that 
his  rebellious  Subjeds  were  Pyrates,  and  that  he  dreaded 
neither  their  Force  nor  their  Threats.  This  faid,  he  threw 
Admiral  Phips^s  Letter  in  the  Major's  face,  and  then  turn'd 
his  Back  upon  him.  Upon  that  the  poor  Ambaffadour  took 
frefh  courage,  and  looking  upon  his  Watch,  took  the  Hberty 
to  ask  Mr.  de  Frontenac,  if  he  could  not  have  his  Anfwer  in 
Writing  before  the  hour  elaps'd.  But  the  Governour  made 
anfwer  with  all  the  haughtinefs  and  difdain  imaginable,  that 
his  Admiral  deferv'd  no  other  anfwer,  than  what  flew  from 
the  Mouth  of  Cannons  and  Muskets.  Thefe  words  were  no 
fooner  pronounc'd    than  the  Major  was  forc'd  to  take  his 


to  A^o/tZj-Amerlca.  247 

Letter  again,  and  being  blind-folded,  was  recondu6ted  to  his 
Sloop,  in  which  he  row'd  towards  the  Fleet  with  all  expedition. 
[163]  The  next  day  about  two  in  the  Afternoon,  fixty 
Sloops  were  fent  aihoar  with  ten  or  twelve  hundred  Men, 
who  ftood  upon  the  Sand  in  very  good  order.  After  that 
the  Sloops  went  back  to  the  Ships,  and  brought  afhoar  the 
like  Compliment  of  Men,  which  was  afterwards  joyn'd  by  a 
third  Complement  of  the  fame  number.  As  foon  as  thefe 
Troops  were  landed,  they  began  to  march  towards  the  City 
with  Drums  beating,  and  Colours  flying.  This  Defcent  was 
made  over  againft  the  Ifle  of  Orleans^  about  a  League  and  a 
half  below  Quebec ;  but  'twas  not  fo  expeditious,  but  that  our 
Confederate  Savages,  with  two  hundred  Coureurs  de  Bois,  and 
fifty  Officers,  had  time  to  pofl:  themfelves  in  a  Copfe  of  thick 
Brambles,  which  lay  half  a  League  oflF  the  place  of  Landing. 
It  being  impoffible  for  fo  fmall  a  Party  to  come  to  an  open 
Battle  with  a  numerous  Enemy,  they  were  forc'd  to  fight 
after  the  manner  of  the  Savages,  that  is,  to  lay  Ambufcadoes 
from  place  to  place  in  the  Copfe,  which  was  a  quarter  of  a 
League  broad.  This  way  of  waging  War  prov'd  wonderfully 
fuccefsful  to  us,  for  our  Men  being  pofted  in  the  middle  of 
the  Copfe,  we  fuflPer'd  the  Englifli  to  enter,  and  then  fir'd 
upon  'em,  lying  flat  upon  the  ground  till  they  fir'd  their 
pieces ;  after  which  we  fprung  up,  and  drawing  into  knots 
here  and  there,  repeated  our  fire  with  fuch  fuccefs,  that  the 
Englifli  Militia  perceiving  our  Savages  fell  into  confufion  and 
diforder,   and   their   Battalions  were   broke ;    infomuch,   that 


248  Some  New  Voyages 

they  betook  themfelves  to  flight,  crying  out,  Indians^  Indians^ 
and  gave  our  Savages  the  opportunity  of  making  a  bloody 
flaughter  among  'em,  for  we  found  three  hundred  Men  left 
upon  the  fpot,  without  any  other  lofs  on  our  fide,  than  that 
of  ten  Coiireiirs  de  Boisy  four  Officers,  and  two  Savages. 

The  next  day  the  Engli/h  landed  four  pieces  of  brafs 
Cannon  mounted  like  Field-pieces,  and  fought  [164]  very 
bravely,  though  they  were  very  ill  difciplin'd.  'Tis  certain 
there  was  no  want  of  Courage  on  their  fide,  and  their  want 
of  Succefs  muft  be  imputed  to  their  unacqaintednefs  with 
Military  Difcipline,  to  their  being  infeebled  by  the  fatigues 
of  the  Sea,  and  to  the  ill  conduit  of  Sir  William  Phips,  who 
upon  this  Enterprife  could  not  have  done  more  than  he  did, 
if  he  had  been  ingag'd  by  us  to  ftand  fl;ill  with  his  hands  in 
his  Pockets.  This  day  pafs'd  over  more  peaceably  than  the 
next :  For  then  the  Engli/h  made  a  frefh  attempt  to  force  their 
paffage  through  the  Copfe,  by  the  help  of  their  Artillery; 
but  they  loft  three  or  four  hundred  more  in  the  attempt,  and 
were  forc'd  to  retire  with  all  diligence  to  the  Landing-place : 
On  our  fide  we  loft  Mr.  de  St.  Helene,  who  dy'd  of  a  wound 
in  his  Leg,  and  about  forty  French-men  and  Savages.  This 
Vi6tory  animated  us  fo  much,  that  we  purfued  the  Englifli  to 
their  Camp,  and  lay  all  Night  flat  upon  the  ground  juft  by  it, 
with  a  defign  to  attack  it  by  the  break  of  day:  But  they  fav'd 
us  the  labour,  for  they  imbarqued  about  Midnight  with  fuch 
confufion,  that  we  kill'd  fifty  more  of  'em,  rather  by  chance, 
than  by  dexterity,  while  they  were  getting  into  their  Boats. 
When  day  came,  we  tranfported  to  Quebec  their  Tents  and 


to  North' Kmtnc2i,  249 

their  Cannon,  which  they  had  left  behind  'em  ;  the  Savages 
being  in  the  mean  time  imploy'd  in  dripping  the  dead  in  the 
Wood. 

The  fame  day  that  the  Defcent  was  made,  Sir  WilUam 
Phips  weigh'd  and  came  to  an  Anchor  with  four  great  Ships, 
at  the  diftance  of  a  Musket-fhot  from  the  lower  City,  where 
we  had  only  one  Battery  of  fix  or  eight  Pounders.  There  he 
Cannonadoed  for  twenty  four  hours  fo  handfomly,  that  the 
fire  of  the  great  Guns  equal'd  that  of  the  fmall  Arms.  The 
dammage  they  did  to  the  roofs  of  the  Houfes,  amounted  to 
five  or  fix  Piftoles  ;  for  as  I  inform'd  you  in  my  firft  Letter,  the 
Walls  of  the  Houfes  are  fo  hard,  that  a  Ball  cannot  pierce  'em. 

[165]  When  Sir  JFilliam  Phips  had  made  an  end  of  thefe 
glorious  Exploits,  he  fent  to  demand  of  Mr.  de  Frontenac  fome 
Englipi  Prifoners  in  exchange  for  the  Sieur  Joliet,  with  his 
Wife  and  his  Mother,  and  fome  Seamen  ;  which  was  forthwith 
put  in  execution.  This  done,  the  Fleet  weigh'd  Anchor  and 
flieer'd  homeward.^  As  foon  as  the  three  Merchantmen  that 
lay  fculking  in  the  River  of  Sagtienay,  faw  the  Fleet  running 
below  Tadouffac  with  full  Sail  before  a  Wefterly  Gale,  they  put 
their  Guns  aboard,  and  purfuing  their  Voyage  with  great  fat- 
isfadion,  arriv'd  at  Quebec  on  the  iith  of  November.  They  had 
fcarce  put  their  Cargoe  on  fhoar,  when  the  bitter  cold  cover'd 
the  River  with  Ice,  which  dammag'd  their  Ships  fo  much,  that 


1  There  exist  many  contemporaneous  accounts  of  Phips's  expedition.  Myrand, 
Sir  William  Phips  devant  ^lebec  (Quebec,  1893),  has  collected  nineteen  from 
archives,  with  all  the  details  of  participants.  He  accuses  Lahontan  of  exaggerating 
the  numbers  of  English  taking  part  and  wounded  in  the  land  battles,  op.  cit. ,  pp.  267- 
276.     For  the  rest,  however,  Lahontan's  account  is  substantially  correct.  —  Ed. 


250  Some  New  Voyages 

they  were  forc'd  to  run  'em  afhoar.  This  troublefom  Froft  was 
as  uneafie  to  me,  as  to  Mr.  de  Frontenac;  for  I  then  faw  that  I 
was  oblig'd  to  pafs  another  Winter  in  Canada^  and  Mr.  de 
Frontenac  was  at  a  lofs,  to  contrive  a  way  of  fending  the  King 
advice  of  this  Enterprife.  But  by  good  luck,  there  came  all 
of  a  fudden  a  downfal  of  Rain,  which  was  follow'd  by  a  Thaw, 
and  was  equally  acceptable  to  us  both.  Immediately  the 
Governour  order'd  an  unrigg'd  Frigat  to  be  rigg'd  and  fitted 
out ;  which  was  done  accordingly  with  fuch  difpatch,  that  the 
Ballaft,  Sails,  Ropes,  and  Mafts,  were  all  in  order  almoft  as 
foon  as  the  Orders  were  given  out.  When  the  Frigat  was 
ready  to  fail,  the  Governour  told  me,  that  the  making  of 
France  as  foon  as  ever  I  could,  would  be  a  piece  of  important 
Service ;  and  that  I  ought  rather  to  perifh,  than  to  fuffer  my 
felf  to  be  taken  by  the  Enemy,  or  to  put  in  at  any  Port  what- 
foever  by  the  way.  At  the  fame  time  he  gave  me  a  particular 
Letter  to  Mr.  de  Seignelay,  the  purport  of  which  was  much  to 
my  advantage. 

I  put  to  Sea  the  20th  of  November^  the  like  of  which  was 
never  feen  in  that  place  before.  At  the  Ifle  of  Coudres  we 
'fcap'd  luckily,  for  there  the  [166]  North-Eaft  Wind  blew 
fo  hard  upon  us,  that  after  we  had  drop'd  Anchor,  we  thought 
to  have  been  fplit  in  pieces  in  the  Night-time.  The  reft  of 
our  paffage  was  good  enough,  for  we  encounter'd  but  one 
Storm  till  we  arriv'd  at  this  place.  Indeed  we  met  with 
contrary  Winds,  about  150  Leagues  off  the  coaft  of  France^ 
which  oblig'd  us  to  traverfe,  and  lye  by  for  a  long  time,  and 
'twas  for  this  reafon  that  our  paffage  was  fo  long. 


to  N orth- Am^nc^.,  251 

I  hear  you  are  now  in  Provence,  and  that  Mr.  de  Seignelai  is 
gone  upon  a  Voyage  to  the  other  World,  which  is  of  a  quite 
different  nature  from  that  I  have  juft  perform'd.  In  earneft, 
Sir,  his  Death  is  the  laft  misfortune  to  the  Navy  of  France,  to 
the  Colonies  of  the  two  America's^  and  to  me  in  particular, 
fince  Mr.  de  Frontenac's  Recommendatory  Letter  is  thereby 
render'd  ufelefs  to  me.     I  am, 

SIR,  Yours,  &c. 


252  Some  New  Voyages 


LETTER    XXI. 

Dated  at  Rochel  July  26.  1691. 
Containing  a  Defcription  of  the  Courts  or  Offices  of  the  Miniflers 
of  State,  and  a  view  of  fome  Services  that  are  ill  rewarded  at 
Court. 

SIR, 

THE  Letter  you  writ  to  me  two  Months  agoe  came  to  my 
Hands  at  Paris;  but  I  could  not  give  you  an  anfwer 
there,  becaufe  I  had  not  then  done  my  bufinefs.  Now  that  I  am 
return'd  to  Rochel,  I  have  leifure  time  enough  to  inform  you 
of  all  that  befell  me  fince  my  return  to  France.  As  foon  as  I 
arriv'd  at  Ferfailles,  I  waited  upon  Mr.  de  Pontchartrain,  [167] 
who  fucceeded  Mr.  de  Seignelai.  I  reprefented  to  him,  that 
Mr.  de  Frontenac  had  given  me  a  Letter  to  his  Predeceffour, 
in  which  he  took  notice  of  the  Services  I  had  done.  I  remon- 
ftrated  to  him,  that  my  Eftate  being  'feiz'd  upon,  and  there 
being  feveral  Law-fuits  to  be  adjufted,  where  my  prefence  was 
neceffary,  I  hop'd  his  Majefl:y  would  give  me  leave  to  quit  his 
Service.  He  made  anfwer,  that  he  had  been  inform'd  of  the 
ftate  of  my  Affairs,  and  that  I  was  allow'd  to  purfue  the  man- 
agement of  'em,  till  the  departure  of  the  laft  Ships  that  are 
bound  this  year  for  Quebec,  to  which  place  he  mean'd  I  fhould 
return.    Having  receiv'd  this  anfwer,  I  went  from  Verfailles  to 


to  iVor^/6-America.  253 

Paris,  where  my  Relations  drew  me  into  a  confultation  of  fev- 
eral  Counfellors,  who  declar'd  that  my  Affairs  were  fo  per- 
plex'd,  that  in  their  opinion,  I  could  not  have  'em  adjufted  in 
fo  fhort  a  time.  In  the  mean  time,  the  Crowns  I  was  forc'd 
to  lug  out  for  this  Confultation,  turn'd  my  Stomach  againfl 
the  going  to  Law  with  Perfons  that  had  fo  much  intereft  in 
the  Parliament  of  Paris;  infomuch,  that  I  was  almofl  in  the 
mind  of  lofing  my  Right,  rather  than  to  enter  upon  the  Law- 
fuit.  However,  I  did  not  fail  to  put  in  for  a  provifion  upon 
my  confifcated  Eftate,  by  vertue  of  my  being  adlually  in  the 
Service.  But  the  folliciting  of  that,  coft  me  fo  much  trouble 
and  charges,  that  though  my  powerful  Adverfaries  had  not 
been  able  to  prevent  the  obtaining  of  my  requeft,  yet  the 
Sum  adjudg'd  thereupon,  would  not  be  fufficient  to  anfwer  the 
charges  I  was  at.  Mejfieiirs  de  Bragelone^  are  very  honourable 
Gentlemen,  as  you  know  very  well.  'Tis  true,  they  love  Pif- 
toles  better  than  their  Relations,  and  upon  that  Principle 
contented  themfelves  in  doing  me  the  honour  of  their  good 
Advice,  for  their  Generofity  do's  not  go  much  further ;  and 
if  I  had  no  other  refuge  than  theirs,  I  fhould  be  but  in  a  forry 
condition.  The  Abbot  of  Ecouttes,^  who  is  more  liberal,  [168] 
tho'  not  fo  rich  as  they,  made  me  a  Prefent  of  a  hundred 
Louis  d'ors,  which  I  applied  to  the  payment  of  the  Fees,  for 
being  receiv'd  into  the  Order  of  St.  Lazarus.    The  Ceremony 


1  Lahontan  belonged  to  the  Gascon  family  of  Bragelonne,  one  member  of  which 
had  been  of  the  Company  of  One  Hundred  Associates,  that  founded  the  colony  of 
New  France.  —Ed. 

2 The  Abbe  de  Couttes,  who  was  an  uncle  of  Lahontan,  being  a  brother  of  his 
mother,  was  an  ecclesiastic  well  known  at  the  court  of  Louis  XIV.  —  Ed. 


254  Some  New  Voyages 

of  that  Inftallment  was  perform'd  in  Mr.  de  Louvois  his  Cham- 
ber, and  did  not  laft  fo  long  as  the  telling  of  the  Money.^ 
I  was  in  hopes  that  this  generous  Abbot  would  have  beftow'd 
upon  me  fome  fimple  Benefice  that  he  might  have  thrown  in 
my  way,  without  injuring  himfelf :  But  it  feems,  a  fcruple  of 
Confcience  ftood  my  Enemy.  Upon  the  whole,  Sir,  I  was  e'en 
forc'd  at  laft  to  go  to  Ferfailles  to  follicit  for  a  Place,  which  is 
the  moft  cutting  and  vexatious  Office  in  the  World.  Do  but 
confider,  Sir,  that  in  thofe  Royal  Apartments  Crowns  fly,  and 
no  body  knows  where  they  go.  One  muft  patiently  attend 
five  or  fix  hours  a  day  in  Mr.  de  Pontchartrain's  Apartments, 
only  to  fhew  himfelf  every  time  that  that  Minifter  goes  out  or 
comes  in. 

He  no  fooner  appears,  than  every  one  crowds  in  to  prefent 
Memorials  clogg'd  with  fifty  Reafons,  which  commonly  fly  off 
as  light  as  the  Wind.  As  foon  as  he  receives  thefe  Petitions, 
he  gives  'em  to  fome  Secretary  or  other  that  follows  him ;  and 
this  Secretary  carries  'em  to  Meffieurs  de  la  Toiiche^  de  Begon^ 
and  de  Saluberri;  whofe  Footmen  receive  Piftoles  from  moft 
of  the  Officers,  who  without  that  Expedient,  would  be  in 
danger  of  catching  cold  at  the  Door  of  the  Office  of  thefe 
Deputies.  'Tis  from  that  expedient  alone,  that  their  good 
or  bad  deftiny  muft  flow.    Pray  undeceive  your  felf,  as  to  your 


1  St.  Lazare  was  one  of  the  military  orders  founded  in  the  eleventh  century,  during 
the  Crusades.  It  was  rich  and  powerful,  and  had  large  property  in  Paris.  In  the 
seventeenth  century  it  was  amalgamated  with  the  order  of  Mont  Carmel,  and  Lahon- 
tan  is  sometimes  known  as  chevalier  of  Notre  Dame  du  Mont  Carmel. 

Franfois  Michel  le  Tellier,  marquis  de  Louvois,  was  the  great  war  minister  of 
the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.  Among  other  honors,  he  received  in  1673  the  office  of  vicar 
general  of  the  orders  of  St.  Lazare  and  Mont  Carmel.  —  Ed. 


=^ 


%^>^ 


io^ 


^  Qh 


./, 


M     k 


Q*"^  Qi..  IS'* 


O^  OKI 


A'^\     *»■'■' 


4^  ^''^jun 


.f 


C>  "^^  O^    O' 


^i 


to  North'A.mQnc^,  255 

notion  of  the  protedion  of  great  Lords  :  The  time  is  gone  in 
which  the  Minlfters  granted  whatever  they  ask'd  for  their 
Baftards,  their  Footmen,  and  their  Vaffals.  There  is  but  two 
or  three  Princes  or  Dukes,  who  being  great  Favourites,  will 
meddle  in  protecting  thofe  that  have  no  immediate  depen- 
dance  upon  'em:  And  if  thefe  do  it,  'tis  very  [169]  feldom ; 
for  you  know  that  the  Gentry  of  France  is  in  no  great  Circum- 
ftances,  and  thefe  great  Lords  have  oftentimes  poor  Friends 
of  their  own,  for  whom  they  are  oblig'd  to  ask  places,  in  order 
to  their  Subfiftence.  As  the  World  goes  now,  the  Minifters 
are  upon  fuch  a  foot,  that  they'll  refufe  any  thing  to  Perfons 
of  the  higheft  Dignity  about  Court,  by  replying,  the  King 
will  have  it  fo,  or  the  King  will  have  it  otherwife.  And  as 
for  the  Topick  of  Merit ;  that's  fuch  a  frightful  Monfter,  that 
it  can  have  no  Reception  in  the  Minifters  Offices,  nay,  moft  of 
the  Minifters  are  ftruck  with  horrour  when  they  think  of  it. 
'Tis  the  Minifters,  in  effed,  that  difpofe  of  all  places,  though 
it  appears  as  if  'twere  the  King.  They  do  what  they  pleafe, 
without  being  accountable  to  him,  for  he  puts  all  upon  the 
affedion  and  zeal  they  ought  to  have  for  his  Service.  They 
carry  Extrads  to  him,  in  which  the  merit  of  the  Officers  they 
mean  to  prefer,  is  either  fuppos'd  or  extoll'd.  But  the  Me- 
morials of  thofe  they  do  not  like,  are  far  from  appearing. 

I'm  forry  I  fliould  be  oblig'd  to  lay  this  truth  before  you ; 
however,  I  mention  no  particular  Minifter,  for  they  are  not 
all  of  that  kidney.  I  know  fome  of  'em  that  would  fcorn  to 
do  the  leaft  injuftice  to  any  Man  whatfoever ;  and  would  not 
fuffer  their  Suiffes,  or  their  Lackeys,  or  even  their  Deputies 


256  Some  New  Voyages 

or  Clerks,  to  intrigue  for  the  preferment  of  fuch  and  fuch 
Perfons  by  the  means  of  Piftoles.  Thefe  dexterous  Intriguers, 
do  by  indire6l  means  make  more  Officers,  than  you  have  hairs 
on  your  Head  ;  and  'tis  for  that  reafon  they  are  faluted  a 
League  off,  and  dignify'd  as  ferioufly  with  the  Title  of  Mon- 
fieur,  as  their  Matters  are  with  that  oi  M  on  feign  eur  ot  Grandeur. 
Thefe  laft  Titles  have  been  acquir'd  by  our  Minifters  and 
Secretaries  of  State,  with  as  much  glory,  as  by  our  Bifhops. 
We  muft  not  think  it  ftrange  therefore,  that  even  our  General 
Officers  [170]  have  the  words  Monfeigneur  and  Grandeur  fo 
frequently  in  their  Mouths,  provided  it  be  accompany'd  with 
that  of  your  Excellency.  I  fwear,  Sir,  I  could  find  matter  for  a 
Book  of  three  hundred  Pages  in  Folio,  if  I  had  a  mind  to  be 
particular  upon  the  intrigues  of  the  Officers  and  Minifters 
of  State  ;  upon  the  means  by  which  the  Sollicitors  compafs 
their  ends,  the  notorious  Knavery  of  a  certain  fort  of  People, 
and  the  patience  with  which  the  Officers  muft  be  fortified  ; 
upon  the  contempt  that  thofe  meet  with,  who  have  no  other 
Recommendation  than  Merit,  and  in  a  word,  upon  all  the 
inftances  of  Injuftice,  that  are  pradlis'd  without  the  King's 
knowledge. 

Let  it  be  as  it  will,  I  muft  acquaint  you  that  after  a  fruitlefs 
Sollicitation  for  what  I  thought  I  had  fome  Title  to,  in  confid- 
eration  of  my  Services,  I  receiv'd  this  Anfwer,  that  the  King 
would  order  Mr.  de  Frontenac  to  provide  for  me  as  handfomly 
as  he  could,  when  an  occafion  offer'd :  So  that  I  was  forc'd 
to  reft  fatisfi'd  with  my  Anfwer,  and  refolve  to  continue  a 


to  North- A\\\tnc2i.  257 

Captain  for  ever ;  for  I  know  very  well  that  the  Governour 
of  Canada  can  not  prefer  me  to  a  higher  Pofl:.^ 

Having  left  Verfailles^  I  came  hither  with  all  expedition, 
and  then  went  to  receive  the  commands  of  the  Intendant  of 
Rochefort.  He  acquainted  me  that  the  Ship  call'd  Honori 
was  fitting  up,  and  that  I  might  fail  as  foon  as  'twas  ready. 
He  recommended  to  me  the  Chevalier  de  Meaiipou^  Madam 
Ponchartrain' s  Nephew,  who  is  to  go  along  with  me.^  This 
Gentleman  having  the  curiofity  to  fee  Canada^  is  come  hither 
from  PariSy  with  a  handfom  Retinue.  'Tis  in  vain  to  fet  forth 
to  him  the  tedioufnefs  of  the  Paffage,  the  inconveniencies  of 
the  Sea,  and  the  difagreeablenefs  of  the  Country ;  for  all  thefe 
Arguments  ferve  only  to  inflame  his  Curiofity.  The  Count 
d'  Aunay  is  to  convoy  us  to  the  Latitude  of  Cape  Finijierre, 
at  which  place  [171]  he  is  to  take  leave  of  us,  and  return  to 
Rochefort.    We  only  fl:ay  for  a  fair  Wind  to  put  to  Sea.     I  am, 

SIR, 

Tours y  &c. 


1  The  king,  in  addition  to  the  bestowal  of  a  military  order,  had  already  pro- 
moted Lahontan  to  a  captaincy.  See  Collecion  de  Manuscrits  de  la  Nowvelle  France, 
ii,  p.  62.  The  governor  of  New  France  had  no  higher  appointment  in  his  power. 
Roy  suggests  that  most  young  officers  of  that  time  would,  at  the  age  of  twenty-five, 
have  been  content  with  such  honors.  —  Ed. 

-  Probably  the  Sieur  de  Maupeau,  who  was  later  president  of  inquests  in  the 
Parliament  of  Paris    and  whose  son  was  chancellor,  1763-68.  — Ed. 


W 


258  Some  New  Voyages 


LETTER    XXII. 

Dated  at  Quebec  Nov.  10.  1691. 

Which  contains  an  Account  of  the  Authors  departure  from  Rochel 
to  Quebec,  of  his  Voyage  to  the  Mouth  of  the  River  St.  Lau- 
rence, of  a  Ren-counter  he  had  with  an  Engllfh  Ship  which 
he  fought ;  of  the  flranding  of  his  Ship;  of  his  failing  through 
the  River  St.  Laurence  ;  of  the  News  he  received,  that  a  Party 
of  the  Englifh  and  Iroquefe  had  defeated  a  Body  of  the  French 
Troops, 

SIR, 

TWO  days  after  I  wrote  to  you,  we  fet  fail  from  the  Har- 
bour of  Rochel,  upon  our  great  Voyage  to  Canada.  On 
the  5/Zj  of  Augufl  we  perceiv'd  a  great  Ship,  which  the  Count 
of  Aunay  gave  chafe  to,  who  having  a  better  Sailer,  came  up 
with  her  in  three  hours  time,  whereupon  (he  on  a  fudden  put 
up  Genoefe  Colours.  Some  Guns  were  fir'd  upon  the  Prow,  to 
oblige  her  to  ftrike  ;  but  the  Captain  was  fo  obftinate,  that 
Mr.  d' Aunay  was  forc'd  to  give  her  a  Broadfide,  which  kill'd 
four  or  five  of  the  Seamen,  whereupon  the  reft  were  oblig'd 
to  put  out  their  Long-boat,  and  carry  to  his  Ship  their  Paff- 
ports  and  Bills  of  Lading.  On  the  loth,  after  [172]  they  had 
taken  the  Latitude,  the  Pilots  thinking  that  they  were  even 
with  Cape  Finifler,   Mr.  d'Aunay  fent  out  his  Long-boat,  to 


to  iVor/^-America.  259 

acquaint  me  that  he  was  then  upon  his  return  home,  upon 
which  I  wrote  him  a  Letter  of  thanks.  Father  Bechefer  a 
Jefuit,  who  had  been  many  years  Superior  of  the  College  of 
Quebec,  whither  he  was  now  going  in  the  fame  Capacity,  was 
forc'd  to  throw  himfelf  into  this  Long-boat,  in  order  to  his 
return  into  France,  having  found  himfelf  continually  indifpos'd, 
from  the  firft  day  we  put  to  Sea.^  On  the  23^  of  Auguft  we 
had  a  great  Storm,  of  Wind  from  the  North- Weft,  which  lafted 
about  twenty  four  hours,  being  then  a  hundred  Leagues  off 
the  Bank  of  Newfound-Land.  This  Bank  takes  its  Name  from 
the  Ifland  of  Newfound-Land,  a  Map  of  which  is  here  annex' d. 
When  the  Storm,  was  over,  there  fucceeded  a  Wind  from 
the  North-Eaft,  which  drove  us  in  ten  or  twelve  hours,  to  the 
Mouth  of  the  River  of  St.  Laurence.  On  the  6th  of  September  wo. 
difcover'd  a  Ship  failing  from  the  Coaft  of  Gafpe,  which  bore 
down  upon  us  with  a  full  fail.  We  thought  at  firft  that  they 
were  French  coming  from  Quebec,  but  their  way  of  working 
the  Ship  difcover'd  to  us  within  an  hour  after,  that  they  were 
Enemies.  After  we  knew  them,  we  prepar'd  to  fight  them, 
and  they  being  about  a  League  to  the  Windward  of  us,  came 
quickly  down  upon  us  with  full  Sail,  within  Musket-fhot. 
Prefently  they  put  up  Engli/h  Colours,  and  gave  us  a  Broad- 
fide  ;  and  we  put  up  our  own  Colours,  and  paid  them  home 
in  their  own  Coyn,     The  Fight  lafted  two  hours,  and  both 


^Thierry  Beschefer,  Jesuit  missionary,  came  to  Canada  in  1665,  and  was  for 
several  years  stationed  among  the  Iroquois.  He  had  been  superior  of  the  Canadian 
missions  since  i68o,  and  in  1688  was  prefect  of  the  College  of  Quebec.  After  this 
mention  by  Lahontan,  he  disappears  from  Canadian  history,  but  is  thought  to  have 
died  at  Rheims  in  171 1.  —  Ed. 


26o  Some  New  Voyages 

fides  fir'd  continually  one  upon  another,  but  the  Sea  being 
tempeftuous,  we  were  oblig'd  to  fhear  off  as  Night  came  on, 
without  fuffering  any  other  lofs,  than  the  wounding  of  two 
Seamen,  and  the  receiving  of  twenty  eight  or  thirty  fhot  in 
our  Mafts,  Sails,  and  Rigging.  Two  days  after  we  met  Mr. 
Diita^  Captain  of  the  Hazardous,  who  was  homeward  bound 
for  [173]  France,  being  a  Convoy  to  ten  or  twelve  Merchant 
Ships.  He  gave  me  fome  Refrefhments,  and  told  me  fome 
news  of  Canada,  which  were  very  acceptable.  We  purfu'd 
our  courfe  in  fpight  of  the  South-Eaft  Wind,  which  oblig'd 
us  to  tack  about  feveral  ways,  till  we  came  to  Portneiif,  near  to 
Tadoujfac}  In  this  place  we  were  ftranded  by  the  fault  of  the 
Coafting-Pilot,  who  being  obftinate  for  calling  Anchor  near 
the  Land,  was  like  to  have  been  the  caufe  of  a  Shipwrack. 
At  Midnight  the  Ship  was  fo  dafh'd  againft  the  Sand,  that 
I  thought  fhe  was  fplit  in  pieces,  but  the  Tide  ebbing  by 
degrees,  fhe  was  left  lying  upon  the  Coaft,  without  any 
apparent  Damage.  I  prefently  caus'd  a  Kedger  to  be  dropt 
in  the  deep  Water  belag'd  with  feveral  Ropes  call'd  Grelins 
Eptjfes  (fee  the  Explication  Table, )^  and  the  next  Morning  the 
Tide  returning  fet  the  Ship  afloat,  and  then  we  haul'd  it  in 
with  the  Capefcan.     On  the  I'T^th  we  call  anchor  near  the  Red 

^The  seigniory  of  Portneuf  lay  a  league  and  a  half  along  the  St.  Lawrence  River 
northeast  of  Tadoussac,  in  the  present  County  of  Chicoutimi,  where  is  now  Portneuf 
River.  The  fief  was  founded  in  1636,  in  favor  of  the  family  of  Le  Neuf  de  la  Poterie  ; 
in  1671  it  passed  by  marriage  to  the  Robineau  family,  who  remained  barons  de  Portneuf 
until  the  conquest  (1760).  —  Ed. 

2 In  the  French  edition  of  1728,  this  term  is  explained  as  follows  :  Grelins  episses, 
cables  made  fast  end  to  end,  interlaced  and  joined,  one  to  the  end  of  the  other  by  means 
of  iron  bolts  which  are  called  "  cornets  d'episse  "  Cspiked  horns).  —  Ed. 


to  iVor^/6- America.  261 

IJland,  and  the  next  day  being  the  14/Z7,  we  pafs'd  that  Chan- 
nel without  danger,  by  the  favour  of  a  frefh  Gale  from  the 
North-Eaft. 

On  the  15//J  we  caft  Anchor  at  the  IJle  of  Hares  ^ :  On  the 
i6th  we  pafs'd  the  Tp  of  Coudres :  On  the  i']th  we  weather'd 
the  Cape  of  Toiirmente,  and  the  next  day  we  anchor'd  in  this 
Port.  From  the  Mouth  of  the  River  to  this  place,  we  had 
the  fineft  Sunfhine  days  that  ever  were  feen  :  During  which 
time,  I  had  both  leifure  and  opportunity  to  view  the  Coafts 
on  the  right  Hand  and  the  left,  while  we  tack'd  about  and 
about  as  the  wind  ferv'd.  When  I  faw  a  great  many  Rivers 
on  the  South  fide,  I  ask'd  the  Pilots  why  the  Ships  us'd  to 
fteer  their  courfe  on  the  North  fide,  where  there  is  no  Anchor- 
age to  be  found,  but  at  Papinachefe^  the  feven  IJles^  and  Port- 
neiif.^  They  anfwer'd  me,  that  the  ordinary  Breezes  of  the 
rough  North-Weft  Wind,  which  blows  upon  this  River  for 
three  quarters  of  a  year,  were  [174]  the  true  caufe  why  they 
durft  not  go  far  from  the  North  fide  ;  and  that  no  body  could 
enfure  a  Ship  that  ftiould  fteer  on  the  South  fide,  except  it 
were  in  the  Months  of  Jtine^  July^  and  Aiigufl.  If  it  were  not 
for  that,  I  believe  it  would  be  more  pleafant,  more  eafie,  and 
lefs  dangerous  to  fail  on  the  South,  than  on  the  North  fide, 


1  Hare  Island  (Isle  au  Lievres)  lies  in  the  River  St.  Lawrence  west  of  Tadoussac. 
It  was  so  named  by  Cartier  (1545),  because  many  hares  were  there  captured  on  his 
voyage  of  discovery.  —  Ed. 

2  Seven  Islands  is  a  group  lying  near  the  northerly  shore  of  the  St.  Lawrence, 
protecting  a  harbor  now  known  as  Seven  Islands  Bay.  Papinachois  is  a  small 
bay  at  the  entrance  of  a  river  of  that  name,  in  Saguenay  County,  Quebec.  It  was 
named  from  a  tribe  of  Montagnais  Indians,  and  is  said  to  signify,  "  I  like  to  laugh  a 
little."  — Ed. 


262  Some  New  Voyages 

becaufe  one  might  caft  Anchor  every  Night  at  the  entrance 
of  thofe  Rivers  which  difcharge  themfelves  all  along  that  Coaft, 
and  would  not  be  oblig'd  to  be  veering  about  continually 
Night  and  Day,  as  he  is  forc'd  to  do,  when  he  fteers  his 
courfe  on  the  North  fide.  This,  Sir,  is  all  I  had  to  fay  at 
prefent  about  our  failing  in  this  River,  which  I  fhall  have 
occafion  to  mention  to  you  again.  After  our  Ship  caft  Anchor 
before  Quebec,  I  landed  with  the  Chevalier  Meaupou,  whom  I 
conduced  to  the  Houfe  of  Mr.  Frontenac,  who  offer'd  to  him 
as  well  as  to  me,  the  ufe  of  his  Table  and  Houfe.  I  am  in- 
form'd  that  300  Engli/hy  and  200  Ircquefe,  approach'd  about 
two  Months  agoe  to  the  Ifle  of  Monreal;  That  the  Governour 
of  that  Ifie  tranfported  15  Companies  from  the  other  fide  of 
the  River,  to  watch  their  motions ;  That  a  Detachment  of  the 
Enemy  having  furpriz'd  our  Out-Guards,  attack'd  the  whole 
Body  of  themx,  and  our  Camp  at  the  fame  time  with  fo  much 
Vigour  and  Courage,  that  they  kill'd  upon  the  fpot  more  than 
three  hundred  Soldiers,  befides  two  Captains,  fix  Lieutenants, 
and  five  Enfigns  ;  and  that  after  this  fatal  Expedition,  Mr. 
Falrenes,  a  Captain  of  the  Marines,  fet  out  for  Monreal,  with 
a  Detachment  of  French  and  Savages,  to  go  to  Fort  Chambli, 
(for  fear  the  Iroquefe  fliould  attack  that  Poft)  who  having  met 
in  their  paffage  a  party  of  Engli/h  and  Iroquefe,  attack'd  them 
vigouroufly,  and  defeated  them.^ 


^This  account  refers  to  the  raiding  party  sent  out  from  Albany  under  Peter 
Schuyler  in  August,  1691.  Schuyler's  report  is  in  A''.  Y.  Colon.  Docs.,  iii,  pp.  800- 
805  ;  that  of  the  French  ibid,  ix,  pp.  520-524.  Parkman  gives  a  good  resume  in 
hrontenac,  pp.  289-294.  Lahontan  has  greatly  exaggerated  the  numbers  of  the  slain 
• — in  all,  about  a  hundred  French  v.ere  killed  and  wounded.  —  Ed. 


to  North- Kvntnc2i.  263 

All  thefe   different  Adventures  give  me   ground  to  con- 

je6lure,  that  it  will  be  much  more   difficult  [175]  than  'tis 

imagin'd,  to  make  a  good  Peace  with  the  five  Nations  of  the 

Iroqiieje.     Mr.  Frontenac  has  given  the  neceffary  Orders  to  all 

the  neighbouring  Habitations,  that  they  fhould  tranfport  a 

great  quantity  of  Stakes  and  Lime  in  the  Winter  time  to  the 

Neighbourhood  of  this  City.    Farewel  Sir,  the  laft  Ships  which 

are  to  depart  hence  for  France,  will  fail  in  three  or  four  days. 

I  am, 

SIR,  Yours,  Sic. 


264  Some  New  Voyages 


LETTER    XXIII. 

Dated  at  Hants  O^ob.  25.  1692. 
Containing  an  Account  of  the  taking  of  feme  Englifh  Veffeb^  of 
defeating  a  Party  of  the  Iroquefe,  of  an  Iroquefe  burnt  alive 
at  Quebec;  of  another  Party  of  thefe  Barbarians^  who  having 
furpriz'd  fome  Coureurs  de  Bois,  were  afterwards  furpriz'd 
themfelves.  Of  the  Project  of  an  Enterprize  proposed  by  Mr. 
Frontenac  to  the  Author.  Of  the  Authors  departure  in  a 
Frigat  for  France,  and  his  flopping  at  Placentia,  which  was 
attacked  by  an  Englifh  Fleet  that  came  to  take  that  Pofl  from 
us.  How  the  Englifh  faiVd  in  their  Defign,  and  the  Author 
purfu'd  his  Voyage. 

SIR, 

THIS  Letter  comes  from  Britany,  and  not  from  Canada, 
from  whence  I  parted  fuddenly  to  return  into  France, 
about  two  Months  after  I  receiv'd  your  Letter,  which  I  could 
not  then  anfwer  for  want  of  an  opportunity.  You  tell  me, 
that  you  are  fatisfi'd  with  the  Defcription  I  have  fent  you  of 
[176]  the  River  St.  Laurence,  and  that  you  would  be  very  glad 
to  have  as  exad  an  account  of  the  whole  Country  of  Canada. 
I  can  fcarce  fatisfie  your  defire  at  prefent,  becaufe  I  have  not 
yet  had  time  to  fort  all  my  Memoirs,  and  therefore  you  mufl 
not  take  it  amifs,  that  I  pray  you  to  fufpend  your  curiofity 


to  North- Km^nc2i,  265 

for  fome  time.  In  the  mean  time,  here  follows  the  Relation 
of  fome  things  that  happen'd  in  Canada,  which  may  be  accept- 
able to  you. 

Immediately  after  the  Ships  parted  from  Quebec  the  laft 
year,  Mr.  Frontenac  order'd  a  Plan  to  be  drawn  of  a  Wall  to 
encompafs  the  City,  and  having  tranfported  thither  all  the 
Materials  neceffary  for  building  fome  Redoubts  of  Stone, 
he  took  care  to  fortifie  it  during  the  Summer.^  Some  days 
agoe  a  Gentleman  of  New-England  call'd  Nelfon,  was  brought 
prifoner  to  Quebec,  who  was  taken  in  the  River  of  Kenebeki, 
upon  the  Coaft  of  Acadia,  together  with  three  Ships  belonging 
to  him,  and  becaufe  he  was  a  very  gallant  Man,  Mr.  Frontenac 
gave  him  a  Lodging  at  his  own  Houfe,  and  treated  him  with 
all  manner  of  Civility.^     About  the  beginning  of  this  year. 


1  The  plans  for  fortifying  Quebec  were  made  by  Levasseur  and  Beaucourt,  two 
young  engineers  from  France.  The  walls,  which  were  the  first  permanent  fortifica- 
tions of  Quebec,  were  about  three-quarters  of  a  mile  in  extent,  stretching  from  Cape 
Diamond  to  St.  Charles  River.  —  Ed 

2John  Nelson,  a  prominent  Boston  merchant,  was  great-nephew  of  Sir  Thomas 
Temple  from  whom  he  had  inherited  rights  to  Nova  Scotia  grants.  During  the 
Andros  revolution  (1689),  beheaded  the  party  that  secured  surrender  of  the  fort  in 
Boston  harbor,  and  used  all  his  influence  against  the  tyrannical  government.  Being 
an  Episcopalian  and  "of  gay  and  free  temper,"  he  was  accorded  no  place  in  the 
provisional  government,  but  opposed  Phips  and  his  plans.  In  1691,  he  was  captured 
in  St.  John's  River  on  his  way  to  Port  Royal.  Frontenac  treated  him  with  marked 
courtesy,  as  a  reward  for  his  kindness  to  French  prisoners  in  Boston.  Having  found 
means  to  send  information  to  Boston  of  an  expected  attack  on  Pemaquid,  Nelson  was 
deported  to  France,  where  he  was  kept  in  solitary  confinement  for  two  years.  Re- 
moved to  the  Bastille,  he  made  propositions  for  an  adjustment  between  the  crowns, 
and  was  sent  to  England  on  parole  (1696).  Refusing  to  break  his  parole,  though 
the  king  forbade  his  return  to  Paris,  he  went  back  and  remained  prisoner  until  the 
peace  of  Ryswick  (1697).  Upon  his  release,  he  had  trouble  with  the  English  author- 
ities because  of  his  disobedience,  but,  after  an  absence  of  ten  years,  was  finally  allowed 
to  return  to  Boston.     In  1707,  he  supported  the  king's  party  in  the  colony.  —  Ed. 


266  Some  New  Voyages 

this  Governour  gave  the  command  of  a  Party  confifting  of 
150  Soldiers,  to  Chevalier  Beaucour,  with  whom  fifty  of  the 
Savages  that  were  our  Friends  were  joyn'd,  in  order  to  march 
on  the  Ice  towards  Fort  Frontenac.  About  thirty  or  forty 
Leagues  from  Monreal,  they  met  a  Company  of  fixty  Iroquefe, 
who  were  difcover'd  by  the  Foot-fteps  of  fome  of  their 
Hunters,  that  had  ftragled  out  of  their  Cottages,  and  the  next 
day  they  were  all  furpriz'd,  and  either  had  their  Throats  cut, 
or  were  made  Prifoners.  The  Sieur  de  la  Plante  who  liv'd 
in  Shvery  with  thefe  Wretches,  had  the  good  fortune  to  be 
prefent  in  their  Company  when  they  were  defeated,  and  he 
had  certainly  been  kill'd  with  his  Mailers,  if  he  had  not  cry'd 
out  with  all  his  Might,  Spare  me,  I  am  a  Frenchman :  He  was 
one  of  [177]  the  four  Officers,  who  had  the  misfortune  to  be 
taken  in  that  fatal  Incurfion,  which  thefe  Tygers  made  into 
Monreal,  as  I  told  you  in  my  ijth  Letter.^  The  Chevalier 
Beaucour  return'd  again  to  the  Colony  with  his  Party,  and 
brought  along  with  him  twelve  Prifoners  of  the  Iroquefe,  who 
were  immediately  conduced  to  Quebec:  After  they  arriv'd, 
Mr.  Frontenac  did  very  judicioufly  condemn  two  of  the  wicked- 
eft  of  the  Company,  to  be  burnt  alive  with  a  flow  Fire.  This 
Sentence  extreamly  terrified  the  Governour's  Lady,  and  the 
Jesuits ;  the  Lady  us'd  all  manner  of  fupplication  to  procure 
a  moderation   of  the  terrible   Sentence,  but  the  Judge  was 


ijosue  Dubois  de  Berthelot,  sieur  de  Beaucourt,  a  young  engineer,  was  the 
second  officer  on  this  expedition,  and  took  command  when  his  superior  became  dis- 
abled. Later,  he  served  the  colony  in  many  capacities,  planning  the  Quebec  fortifica- 
tions of  1712  ;  acting  as  army  officer  in  Newfoundland  in  1705  ;  and  as  governor  of 
Three  Rivers  in  1730.  —  Ed. 


to  iVor^Z>- America.  267 

inexorable,  and  the  Jefuits  employ'd  all  their  Eloquence  in 
vain  upon  this  occafion.  The  Governour  anfwered  them, 
*'  That  it  was  abfolutely  neceffary  to  make  fome  terrible  ex- 
*'  amples  of  Severity  to  frighten  the  Iroquefe  ;  That  fince  thefe 
"  Barbarians  burnt  almoft  all  the  French^  who  had  the  mis- 
"  fortune  to  fall  into  their  Hands,  they  muft  be  treated  after 
"  the  fame  manner,  becaufe  the  Indulgence  which  had  hitherto 
"  been  fhown  them,  feem'd  to  authorize  them  to  invade  our 
"  Plantations,  and  fo  much  the  rather  to  do  it,  becaufe  they 
"  run  no  other  hazard,  than  that  of  being  taken,  and  well  kept 
"  at  their  Mailer's  Houfes  ;  but  when  they  {hould  underftand 
"  that  the  French  caus'd  them  to  be  burnt,  they  would  have 
"  a  care  for  the  future,  how  they  advanc'd  with  fo  much 
"  boldnefs  to  the  very  Gates  of  our  Cities ;  and  in  fine.  That 
"  the  Sentence  of  Death  being  paft,  thefe  two  wretches  muft 
"  prepare  to  take  a  Journey  into  the  other  World.  This 
obftinacy  appear'd  furprizing  in  Mr.  Frontenac^  who  but  a 
little  before  had  favour'd  the  efcape  of  three  or  four  Perfons 
liable  to  the  Sentence  of  Death,  upon  the  importunate  prayer 
of  Madam  the  Governefs ;  but  though  fhe  redoubled  her 
earneft  Supplications,  fhe  could  not  alter  his  firm  Refolution 
as  [178]  to  thefe  two  Wretches.^  The  Jefuits  were  thereupon 
fent  to  Baptize  them,  and  oblige  them  to  acknowledge  the 
Trinity,  and  the  Incarnation,  and  to  reprefent  to  them  the 


^  The  lady  who  plead  for  the  Iroquois  must  have  been  the  intendant's  wife, 
Madame  de  Champigny,  as  the  Countess  de  Frontenac  never  came  to  New  France. 
The  Jesuits  later  reported  that  t'le  terrible  example  made  of  this  Iroquois  prisoner  had 
a  good  effect,  in  causing  that  nation  to  cease  or  mitigate  the  tortures  of  the  captured 
French.  —  Ed. 


268  Some  New  Voyages 

Joys  of  Paradife,  and  the  Torments  of  Hell,  within  the  fpace 
of  eight  or  ten  hours.  You  will  readily  confefs,  Sir,  that  this 
was  a  very  bold  way  of  treating  thefe  great  Myfteries,  and 
that  to  endeavour  to  make  the  Iroquefe  underftand  them  fo 
quickly,  was  to  expofe  them  to  their  Laughter.  Whether 
they  took  thefe  Truths  for  Songs,  I  do  not  know ;  but  this  I 
can  affure  you,  that  from  the  Minute  they  were  acquainted 
with  this  fatal  News,  they  fent  back  thefe  good  Fathers  with- 
out ever  hearing  them ;  and  then  they  began  to  fing  the  fong 
of  Death,  according  to  the  cuftom  of  the  Savages.  Some 
charitable  Perfon  having  thrown  a  Knife  to  them  in  Prifon, 
he  who  had  the  leaft  Courage  of  the  two,  thruft  it  into  his 
Breaft,  and  died  of  the  Wound  immediately.  Some  young 
Hiirons  of  Lorette,  aged  between  fourteen  and  fifteen  years, 
came  to  feize  the  other,  and  carry  him  away  to  the  Diamant 
Cape,  where  notice  was  given  to  prepare  a  great  pile  of 
Wood.  He  ran  to  death  with  a  greater  unconcernednefs, 
than  Socrates  would  have  done,  if  he  had  been  in  his  cafe. 
During  the  time  of  Execution  he  fung  continually;  "That 
"  he  was  a  Warriour,  brave  and  undaunted ;  that  the  moft 
"  cruel  kind  of  Death  could  not  fhock  his  Courage,  that 
"  no  Torments  could  extort  from  him  any  Cries,  that  his 
"  Companion  was  a  Coward  for  having  kill'd  himfelf  through 
"the  fear  of  Torment;  and  laftly,  that  if  he  was  burnt,  he 
"had  this  Comfort,  that  he  had  treated  many  French  and 
"  Hurons  after  the  fame  manner.  All  that  he  faid  was  very 
true,  and  chiefly  as  to  his  own  courage  and  firmnefs  of  Soul; 


to  North-Kmtnc2i,  269 

for  I  can  truly  fwear  to  you,  that  he  neither  fhed  Tears,  nor 
was  ever  perceiv'd  to  Sigh ;  but  on  the  contrary,  during 
all  the  time  that  he  fufFer'd  [179]  the  moft  horrible  Tor- 
ments that  could  be  invented,  and  which  lafted  about  the 
fpace  of  three  hours,  he  never  ceas'd  one  Minute  from 
finging.  The  foles  of  his  Feet  were  roafted  before  two 
great  Stones  red  hot,  for  more  than  a  quarter  of  an  hour; 
the  tops  of  his  Fingers  were  fcorch'd  in  a  Stove  of  lighted 
Pipes ;  during  which  Torture  he  did  not  draw  back  his 
Hand.  After  this  the  feveral  joynts  of  his  Body  were  cut 
off,  one  after  another  :  The  Nerves  of  his  Limbs  and  Arms 
were  diftorted  with  a  little  Iron  Wand,  after  fuch  a  manner, 
as  cannot  poffibly  be  exprefs'd.  In  fine,  after  many  other 
Tortures,  the  hair  of  his  Head  was  taken  off  after  fuch  a  man- 
ner, that  there  remain'd  nothing  but  the  Skull,  upon  which 
thefe  young  Executioners  were  going  to  throw  fome  burning 
Sand,  when  a  certain  Slave  of  the  Hurons  of  Lorette^  by  the 
order  of  Madam  the  Governefs,  knock'd  him  on  the  head 
with  a  Club,  which  put  an  end  to  his  Martyrdom.  As  to  my 
felf,  I  vow  and  fwear,  that  the  Prologue  of  this  Tragedy,  cre- 
ated in  me  fo  great  a  Horror,  that  I  had  not  the  curiofity  to 
fee  the  end  of  it,  nor  to  hear  this  poor  Wretch  fing  to  the  laft 
moment  of  his  Life.  I  have  feen  fo  many  burnt  againft  my 
Will,  amongft  thofe  People  where  I  fojourn'd,  during  the 
courfe  of  my  Voyages,  that  I  cannot  think  of  it  without 
trouble.  'Tis  a  fad  Spedtacle,  at  which  every  one  is  obliged 
to  be  prefent,  when  he  happens  to  Sojourn  among  thefe  Sav- 


270  Some  New  Voyages 

age  Nations,  who  inflI6t  this  cruel  kind  of  Death  upon  their 
Prifoners  of  War ;  for  as  I  have  told  you  in  one  of  my  Let- 
ters, all  the  Savages  pradife  this  barbarous  Cruelty.  Nothing 
is  more  grating  to  a  civil  Man,  than  that  he  is  oblig'd  to  be  a 
Witnefs  of  the  Torments  which  this  kind  of  Martyrs  fuffer ; 
for  if  any  one  fhould  pretend  to  {hun  this  Sight,  or  exprefs 
any  CompafTion  for  them,  he  would  be  efteem'd  by  them  a 
Man  of  no  Courage. 

[180]  After  the  Navigation  was  open  and  free,  the  Sieur 
St.  Michel  a  Canadan,  fet  out  from  Monreal  for  the  Beaver 
Lakes,  at  the  Head  of  a  Party  of  the  Coreurs  de  Bois,  with 
feveral  Canows  laden  with  fuch  Goods  as  are  proper  for  the 
Savages.  In  their  paffage  from  Long-Saut^  to  the  River  of  the 
Outaoiias,  they  met  fixty  Iroquefe,  who  furpriz'd  them,  and  cut 
all  their  Throats  except  four,  that  had  the  good  fortune  to 
efcape,  and  carry  the  news  to  Monreal.^  As  foon  as  this  fatal 
accident  was  known,  the  Chevalier  Vaudreuil^  put  himfelf  in  a 
Canow  with  a  Detachment,  and  purfu'd  this  party  of  h'oqueje^ 
being  follow'd  by  a  hundred  Canadans,  and  fome  confederate 
Savages.  I  know  not  by  what  chance  he  had  the  good  fortune 
to  overtake  them,  but  fo  it  was,  he  furpriz'd  them,  and  at- 
tack'd  them  with  Vigour,  upon  which  they  fought  defperately, 
but  at  laft  they  were  defeated.  This  Vidlory  coft  us  the  lives 
of  many  of  our  Savages,  and  of  three  or  four  of  our  Officers. 


1  St.  Michel,  the  leader,  was  carried  captive  to  Onondaga,  whence  he  escaped  in 
1693,  just  as  he  was  to  be  burned  at  the  stake.  Nearly  naked,  without  food  or 
weapons,  he  made  his  way  in  twenty-four  days  to  Quebec,  where  he  gave  warning  of 
an  approaching  Iroquois  raid.  — Ed. 


to  N orth- Kvn^xicdi,  271 

The  Iroq^ueje  that  were  taken,  were  carried  to  the  City  of 
Monreal,  near  which  place  they  were  regal'd  with  a  Salvo  of 
Baftinadoes.^ 

About  the  beginning  of  the  Month  of  July,  Mr.  Frontenac 
having  receiv'd  fome  News  from  the  Commander  of  the 
Lakes,^  fpoke  to  me  of  a  certain  Projedl,  which  I  had  formerly 
fhown  him  to  be  of  great  Importance  :  But  becaufe  he  did  not 
fufficiently  confider  all  the  advantages  that  might  be  reap'd 
from  it,  and  on  the  contrary,  apprehended  a  great  many 
difficulties  would  attend  the  putting  it  in  execution,  he  had 
altogether  negleded  this  AflFair,  of  which  I  fhall  give  you  the 
following  account. 

I  obferv'd  to  you  in  my  17/^  Letter,  the  great  Importance 
and  Advantage  of  the  Forts  of  Frontenac  and  Niagara^  and 
that  in  the  conjuncture  of  Circumftances  wherein  Mr.  Denon- 
ville  then  found  them,  it  was  impoflible  to  preferve  them. 
You  have  alfo  [181]  remarqu'd  the  advantages  which  the 
Savages  have  over  the  Europeans,  by  their  way  of  fighting  in 
the  Forrefts  of  this  vaft  Continent.  Since  we  cannot  deftroy 
the  Iroqiiefe  with  our  own  fingle  Forces,  we  are  neceffarily 
oblig'd  to  have  recourfe  to  the  Savages  that  are  our  Allies  : 
And  'tis  certain,  as  they  themfelves  forefee,  that  if  thefe  Bar- 


^  For  an  account  of  Vaudreuil's  pursuing  party,  see  N.  Y.  Colon.  Docs.,  ix,  pp. 
531,  536.  —  Ed. 

2  This  was  Louis  de  la  Porte,  sieur  de  Louvigny,  who  was  commandant  at  Mack- 
inac 1690-94.  He  was  an  able  officer,  who  saw  much  sen'ice  in  the  colony;  was 
major  of  Quebec  in  1703  ;  led  several  expeditions  to  the  upper  country,  notably  that 
of  1716  to  Wisconsin  ;  and  was  drowned  in  a  shipwreck  (1725).  For  fuller  details 
see  Wis.  Hist.  Colls.,  v,  pp.  67-77,  108-no;  xvi,  index.  —  Ed. 


272  Some  New  Voyages 

barians  could  compafs  the  Deftrudllon  of  our  Colonies,  they 
would  be  fubdued  by  them  fooner  or  later,  as  it  has  happen'd 
to  many  other  Nations,  fo  they  know  it  to  be  their  Intereft  to 
joyn  with  us  to  deftroy  thefe  BanditVs,.  Now  fince  they  are 
well  affedted  to  this  defign,  we  muft  endeavour  to  faciliate  to 
them  the  means  of  putting  it  in  execution,  for  you  may  eafily 
believe  that  thefe  People,  as  favage  as  they  are,  are  not  fo 
void  of  Senfe,  as  to  travel  two  or  three  hundred  Leagues  from 
their  own  Country,  to  fight  againft  their  Enemies,  without 
being  fure  of  a  place  of  retreat,  where  they  may  repofe  them- 
felves,  and  find  Provifions.  There  is  no  queftion  therefore, 
but  we  fhould  build  Forts  upon  the  Lands  of  the  Iroquefe,  and 
maintain  them  in  fpite  of  their  Teeth.  This,  Sir,  is  what  I 
propos'd  above  a  year  agoe  to  Mr.  Frontenac,  and  it  is  what 
he  would  have  me  flill  to  undertake.  I  projedl  therefore,  to 
build  and  maintain  three  Forts  upon  the  courfe  of  the  Lakes, 
with  fome  Veffels  that  fhall  go  with  Oars,  which  I  will  build 
according  to  my  Fancy ;  but  they  being  light,  and  of  great 
carriage,  may  be  manag'd  either  with  Oars  or  a  Sail,  and  will 
alfo  be  able  to  bear  the  fhocks  of  the  Waves.  I  demand  fifty 
Seamen  of  the  French  Bifcay,  for  they  are  known  to  be  the 
moft  dexterous  and  able  Mariners  that  are  in  the  World.  I 
muft  alfo  have  two  hundred  Soldiers,  chofen  out  of  the  Troops 
of  Canada.  I  will  build  three  little  Caftles  in  feveral  places, 
one  at  the  mouth  of  the  Lake  Errie,  which  you  fee  in  my  Map 
of  Canada,  under  the  name  of  Fort  Suppofe,  befides  two  [182] 
others.  The  fecond  I  will  build  in  the  fame  place  where  It 
was  when  I  maintaln'd  it.  In  the  years  1687,  and  1688,  whereof 


to  North- Axntncdi,  273 

I  have  wrote  to  you  in  my  14/Z?  and  i^tb  Letter:  and  the  third 
at  the  Mouth  of  the  Bay  of  Toronto^  upon  the  fame  Lake.^ 
Ninety  Men  will  be  fufficient  to  Garrifon  thefe  three  Re- 
doubts, and  perhaps  a  fmaller  number;  for  the  Iroquefe  who 
never  favv  a  Canon,  but  in  a  Pidlure,  and  to  whom  an  ounce 
of  Powder  is  more  precious  than  a  Lewis-D'or,  can  never  be 
perfwaded  to  attack  any  kind  of  Fortification.  I  defire  of  the 
King  for  putting  this  Projedl  in  execution,  15000  Crowns  a 
year,  for  the  Maintenance,  Entertainment,  Subfiftance,  and 
pay  of  thefe  250  Men.  It  will  be  very  eafie  for  me  to  tranf- 
port  with  the  abovemention'd  Veffels  400  Savages,  into  the 
Country  of  the  Iroqnefe,  whenever  I  have  a  mind.  I  can  carry 
Provifions  for  2000,  and  tranfport  as  many  Sacks  of  Indian 
Corn,  as  are  neceffary  for  maintaining  thefe  Forts  both  in 
Winter  and  Summer.  'Tis  eafie  to  have  plenty  of  Hunting 
and  Shooting  in  all  the  Ifles,  and  to  contrive  ways  for  crofTmg 
the  Lakes ;  and  it  will  be  fo  much  the  more  eafie  to  purfue 
the  Iroquefe  in  their  Canows,  and  fink  them,  that  my  Veffels 
are  light,  and  my  Men  fight  under  a  Cover.  In  fine,  if  you 
faw  the  Memorial  which  I  am  to  prefent  to  Mr.  PontchartraiUy 
you  would  find  that  this  Enterprize  is  the  fineft  and  moft 
ufeful  that  can  be  invented,  to  diftrefs  the  h-oquefe  in  time  of 
War,  and  confine  them  within  bounds  in  time  of  Peace.     Mr. 


1  Toronto  Lake  was  the  early  name  of  Lake  Simcoe.  Lahontan  appears  to  apply 
it  to  the  entire  Georgian  Bay,  whence  the  Toronto  portage  led  through  the  peninsula 
to  Lake  Ontario.  His  intended  fort  was  to  control  this  passage  to  Canada,  as  that  on 
Lake  Erie  commanded  the  route  by  the  Great  Lakes.  A  contemporary  document  ap- 
pears to  be  concerned  with  that  part  of  Lahontan's  project  that  related  to  the  post  at 
Detroit.  See  Roy,  Lahontan,  pp.  94,  95.  —  Ed. 
13 


274  Some  New  Voyages 

Frontenac  has  joyn'd  to  it  a  private  Letter  to  Mr.  Pontchartrain, 
wherein  he  obferves  to  him,  that  if  this  Projedi;  were  well  put 
in  execution,  thefe  terrible  Enemies  would  be  oblig'd  in  two 
years  time,  to  abandon  their  Country.  After  this  he  adds, 
that  he  judges  me  fufficiently  qualified  to  go  upon  fuch  an 
Interprife;  and  believes  I  will  make  my  point  good.  Perhaps 
he  might  have  light  on  others  that  know  the  Country  and 
Cuftoms  of  the  Savages  better  than  [183]  I  do :  But  by  an 
accident  which  do's  not  tend  much  to  my  advantage,  I  have 
purchas'd  the  Efteem  and  Friendfhip  of  thefe  Savages,  which 
in  my  opinion  was  the  only  reafon  that  mov'd  Mr.  de  Fron- 
tenac to  fmgle  out  me  for  this  Service. 

July  the  2^th  the  Governour  having  given  me  his  Packet  for 
the  Court,  and  the  St.  Ann  Frigat  being  rigg'd  and  fitted  out 
according  to  his  Orders,  I  imbarqu'd  in  the  Port  of  Quebec, 
and  after  five  days  failing,  we  met  in  the  River  of  St.  Laurence, 
over  againft  Monts  notredame,  twelve  Merchantmen  bound  from 
France  for  Quebec,  under  the  Convoy  of  Mr.  d'Iberville,  Cap- 
tain of  the  Poll}  Auguft  the  %th,  we  got  clear  of  the  Bay  of 
St.  Laurence,  by  the  help  of  a  Wefterly  Gale,  and  that  in  fuch 
fair  and  clear  Weather,  that  we  defcry'd  the  Iflands  of  Cape 
Breton  and  Newfound-Land,  as  diftindly,  as  if  we  had  been 
within  a  Musket-fhot  of  'em.  The  nine  or  ten  following  days 
were  fo  far  of  a  different  ftamp,  that  we  could  fcarce  fee  from 

1  Iberville  was  to  continue  to  the  coast  of  Acadia  and  attack  Fort  Pemaquid. 
The  plan  proved  abortive,  because  the  English  authorities  were  notified  by  the 
prisoner  Nelson.  The  "  Poll  "  was  wrecked  the  following  year  off  the  coast  of  New- 
foundland. —  Ed. 


to  North- PsATitnc2i,  275 

the  Prow  to  the  Poop  of  the  Ship,  for  all  of  a  fudden  there 
fell  the  thickeft  and  darkeft  Fog  that  ever  I  faw.  At  the  end 
of  thefe  days  the  Horlfon  clearing  up,  we  flood  in  for  New- 
found-Land, defcrying  Cape  St.  Mary;  and  by  making  all  the 
fail  we  could,  arriv'd  that  very  day  in  the  Port  of  Placentia} 

In  that  Port  I  found  fifty  Filhermen,  moft  of  which  were 
of  French  Bifcay,  and  thought  to  have  fet  out  for  France  along 
with  them  in  a  few  days :  But  they  were  longer  in  getting 
ready  than  I  thought  for,  and  when  we  were  juft  ready  to 
break  ground,  we  were  inform'd  by  fome  Fifhermen,  that  five 
large  EngliJJi  Ships  were  come  to  an  Anchor  near  Cape  St. 
Mary.  This  Intelligence  prov'd  very  true,  for  on  the  i^th  of 
September  they  caft  Anchor  in  fight  of  Placentia.  The  16th  they 
weigh'd,  and  came  to  an  Anchor  in  the  Road,  out  of  the  reach 
of  our  Guns.  Upon  this  the  Governour  was  not  a  little  per- 
plex'd,  for  he  had  but  fifty  Soldiers  in  his  Fort,  and  a  very 
[184]  fmall  moiety  of  Ammunition.  Befides,  the  Fort  was 
commanded  by  a  Mountain,  from  whence  he  might  be  gall'd 
with  Stones  flung  out  of  Slings;  and  'twas  to  be  fear'd,  the 
EngUfli  would  poffefs  themfelves  of  that  high  Ground.  I 
march'd  with  fixty  of  the  Seamen  belonging  to  the  Fifhermen, 
to  prevent  their  Landing,  in  cafe  they  attempted  to  make  a 

1  Placentia,  the  French  post  upon  Newfoundland,  possessed  an  excellent  harbor. 
Together  with  a  portion  of  the  southern  shore  of  the  island,  it  had  been  sold  (1662) 
by  Charles  II  to  Louis  XIV,  who  immediately  erected  a  fortification  at  this  point. 
Before  King  William's  War,  the  defences  had  fallen  into  ruin,  and  the  place  become 
the  resort  of  privateers  who  sallied  forth  to  attack  Engiiih  fishing  and  trading  vessels. 
Since  1690  the  French  had  been  occupied  in  restoring  the  stronghold,  and  rebuilding 
the  fort,  named  St.  Louis.  —  Ed. 


276  Some  New  Voyages 

Defcent  at  a  certain  place  call'd  la  Fontaine;  and  I  compafs'd 
my  end  without  firing  a  Gun.  In  effecft,  fix  or  feven  hundred 
Englijh  put  in  to  the  Land  in  twenty  Sloops,  with  a  defign  to 
have  landed  at  that  place  ;  upon  which  my  vigorous  Canta- 
brians  being  full  of  fire  and  forwardnefs,  appear'd  too  foon 
upon  the  fhoar,  in  fpite  of  my  Teeth,  and  by  that  means  oblig'd 
the  EngUfli  to  take  another  courfe,  and  row  with  all  their  might 
to  the  back  of  a  little  Cape,  where  they  threw  in  a  Barrel  of 
Pitch  and  Tar  that  burnt  two  arpents  of  Thickets.  The  i%th 
about  Noon,  perceiving  that  a  little  Sloop  put  off  from  the 
Admiral  with  a  white  Flag  on  its  Prow,  and  made  towards  the 
Fort,  I  run  in  thither  immediately.  The  Governour  had  took 
care  to  fend  out  one  of  his  own  Sloops  with  the  fame  Flag,  to 
meet  the  other,  and  was  furpris'd  when  fhe  return'd  with  two 
Englijh  Officers  on  board.  Thefe  Officers  gave  the  Governour 
to  underftand,  that  the  Admiral  defir'd  he  would  fend  an 
Officer  on  board  of  him,  which  was  done  accordingly;  for 
Mr.  de  Cofte-belle^  and  I,  went  on  board  of  the  Admiral,  who 
receiv'd  us  with  all  Refpe(5t  and  Civility,  and  regal'd  us  with 
Sweet-meats,  and  feveral  forts  of  Wines,  with  which  we  drank 
the  Healths  of  the  Admirals  of  France^  and  England.  He 
fhew'd  us  his  whole  Ship,  to  the  very  Carriages  of  the  Guns, 


^  Sieur  Pastour  de  Costabelle  was  sent  to  Placentia  in  1687  in  command  of  a 
detachment  of  troops.  Upon  the  retirement  of  the  govermr,  he  assumed  control  until 
superseded  by  De  Brouillon  (1690) ,  under  whom  he  became  second  in  command,  and 
with  whom  he  was  a  confederate  in  enriching  himself  from  the  profit  of  the  public 
service.  In  1701  Costabelle  succeeded  De  Brouillon  as  governor  of  Placentia — an 
office  he  held  for  about  twelve  years,  when  he  was  sent  to  take  charge  of  Isle  Royal 
(Cape  Breton) .  —  Ed. 


to  7Vor^Z>-America.  277 

and  then  gave  the  Sieur  de  Coflebelle  to  know,  that  'twould  be 
a  great  trouble  to  him  to  be  oblig'd  to  take  Placentia  by  the 
force  of  Arms,  in  regard  that  he  forefaw,  fuch  an  Enterprife 
would  prove  fatal  to  the  Governour,  to  the  Garrifon,  and  all 
the  [185]  Inhabitants,  upon  the  account  that  he  would  find  a 
great  deal  of  difficulty  in  preventing  the  Pillaging  and  other 
Diforders;  That  in  order  to  avoid  this  Misfortune,  'twould 
be  a  prudential  part  in  the  Governour  to  come  to  a  Compofi- 
tion.  Our  Officer  being  fully  acquainted  with  the  Governour's 
Mind,  made  anfwer  in  his  name,  that  he  was  refolv'd  upon  a 
vigorous  defence,  and  would  rather  fpring  the  place  in  the 
Air,  than  furrender  it  to  the  Enemies  of  the  King  his  Mafter. 
After  a  mutual  exchange  of  Compliments,  we  took  leave  of 
him,  and  being  ready  to  get  into  our  Sloop,  he  told  us  with 
embraces,  that  he  was  infinitely  forry  he  could  not  falute  us 
with  his  Guns,  in  the  room  of  which  he  order'd  five  or  fix 
Huzza's,  with  a  Long  live  the  King.  When  we  went  into  the 
Boat,  we  return'd  him  the  fame  number  of  fhouts,  to  which 
he  return'd  a  feventh  that  finifh'd  the  Ceremony.  Upon  our 
return  to  the  Fort,  Mr.  de  Coflebelle  gave  the  Governour  an 
account  of  the  force  of  the  Admiral's  Ship.  The  St.  Albans 
(fo  the  Ship  was  call'd)  carried  fixty  fix  Guns  mounted,  and 
fix  hundred  Men  Complement,  but  the  other  Ships  appear'd 
to  be  of  lefs  force. 

The  next  day,  which  was  the  19/i?,  they  advanc'd  within 
Canon-fhot  of  the  Fort,  where  they  lay  bye,  while  a  Sloop 
row'd  up  to  the  Batteries.     The  Governour  fent  out  another 


278  Some  New  Voyages 

Sloop  to  know  what  the  matter  was,  and  was  anfwer'd,  that  if 
he  had  a  mind  for  a  Parley  in  the  time  of  the  Ingagement, 
he  fhould  put  up  a  red  Flag  for  a  Signal.  I  was  then  pofted 
at  la  Fontaine^  to  oppofe  a  Defcent ;  for  that  was  the  only 
place  that  could  be  ferviceable  to  the  Engli/h^  in  order  to 
mafter  Placentia.  The  EngUjh  ought  to  have  confider'd,  that 
their  Cannon  would  do  no  fervice  againft  an  impenetrable 
Rampart,  and  that  they  would  lofe  their  labour  in  fhooting 
againft  Flints  and  Earth.  But  it  feems,  they  were  oblig'd  by 
exprefs  Orders  from  the  Prince  of  Ora?ige,  to  do  [186]  it,  and 
at  the  fame  time  to  expofe  themfelves  to  the  danger  of  being 
funk,  which  had  certainly  been  effedled,  if  we  had  had  Powder 
and  Ball  enough  for  the  Canonading  lafted  almoft  five  hours. 
The  20th  a  French  Pilot  who  was  Prifoner  on  board  of  the 
Admiral,  made  his  efcape  by  throwing  himfelf  into  the  Sea  in 
the  Night-time.  He  landed  at  the  place  where  I  lay  in  Am- 
bufcade;  and  after  he  had  given  me  an  account  of  what  pafs'd 
in  the  Fleet,  I  fent  him  to  the  Governour's  Houfe.  He 
inform'd  me,  that  they  had  defign'd  a  Defcent  with  feven  or 
eight  hundred  Men,  but  alter'd  their  Refolution,  upon  the 
apprehenfion,  that  there  were  fourteen  or  fifteen  hundred 
Seamen  ready  to  oppofe  them  ;  that  they  were  of  the  opinion, 
that  my  fixty  Bijcayans  who  difcover'd  themfelves  upon  the 
fhoar  at  la  Fontaine^  in  fpite  of  all  I  could  do,  had  no  other 
view  but  to  draw  'em  into  an  Ambufcade,  by  tempting  'em 
to  come  up.  The  21ft  they  fet  fail  with  a  North-Eaft  Gale, 
after  having  burnt  all  the  Houfes  at  Pointe  Verte^  where  the 
Governour  had  fent  a  Detachment  by  way  of  Precaution  that 


to  iV(??t^- America.  279 

fame  very  day ;  but  the  ways  were  fo  impradiicable,  that  the 
Detachment  could  not  get  there  in  time  to  oppofe  the  Enemy. 
This  one  may  juftly  fay,  that  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  Cap- 
tains of  the  Bifcay  Ships  that  were  then  at  Placentia^  that  place 
had  undoubtedly  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  Englifh  :  And 
this  I  can  convince  you  of,  when  you  and  I  meet.  In  this 
bloody  Expedition,  the  Englifi  loft  fix  Men ;  and  on  our  fide 
the  Sieur  Boat^  Lieutenant  of  a  Nayites  Vefifel,  had  his  Arm 
fhot  off.  In  fine,  the  Ef7gli/h  did  all  that  Men  could  do,  fo 
that  nothing  can  be  faid  againft  their  Condu6l.^ 

October  the  6th^  I  took  fhipping  in  purfuit  of  my  Voyage 
to  France^  being  accompany'd  with  feveral  other  Veffels.  The 
Wefterly  Winds  were  fo  favourable  to  us  in  our  paffage,  that 
we  came  to  an  Anchor  [187]  on  the  23^  at  St.  Nazere^  which 
lies  but  eight  or  nine  Leagues  for  this  place. ^  I  am  to  fet  out 
immediately  for  Ferfailles;  in  the  mean  time,  I  am, 

SIR, 

Yours,  &c. 


^The  English  ships  were  commanded  by  Commodore  Williams,  whose  manage- 
ment of  the  attack  was  later  criticized.  Comparison  with  the  documentary  reports  of 
this  expedition,  proves  that  Lahontan  was  accurate  in  this  account.  Charlevoix  drew 
from  it  largely  in  his  History,  iv,  pp.  222-226.  The  governor  represented  to  the  court 
the  services  of  Lahontan  on  this  occasion.     See  Roy,  Lahontan,  p.  97.  —  Ed. 

2  St.  Nazaire  is  a  harbor  at  the  mouth  of  the  Loire  River.  — Ed. 


28o  Some  New  Voyages 


LETTER    XXIV. 

Dated  ?it  Nantes  May  lo.  1693. 

Containing  an  Account  of  Mr.  Frontenac'i  Proje5i,  which  was 
reje^ed  at  Courts  and  the  reafon  why  it  was  rejected.  The 
King  gives  the  Author  the  Lieutenancy  of  the  Ifle  of  New- 
found Land,  ^c.  together  with  a  free  Independent  Company. 

SIR, 

I  AM  now  once  more  at  Nantes,  from  whence  I  wrote  to  you 
in  October  lafl.  I  am  now  return'd  from  Court,  where  I 
prefented  to  Mr.  Pontchartrain  Mr.  Frontenac's  Letters,  and 
the  Memorial  I  mention'd  in  my  laft.  I  was  anfwer'd,  that  it 
would  not  be  proper  to  execute  the  Projedt  I  propos'd  be- 
caufe  the  forty  Seamen  which  were  neceffary  for  my  purpofe, 
could  not  now  be  allow'd  me,  and  befides  the  King  had  given 
Orders  to  Mr.  Frontenac,  to  make  Peace  with  the  Iroquefe  upon 
any  terms  whatfoever.  This  Inconveniency  alfo  was  found  to 
attend  the  Projed,  that  after  the  Forts  which  I  intended  to 
build  upon  the  Lakes  were  intirely  finifh'd,  the  Savages  that 
are  our  Friends  and  Confederates,  would  rather  feek  after 
Glory,  by  making  [188]  War  upon  the  Iroquefe,  than  take 
pleafure  in  Hunting  the  Beavers,  which  would  be  a  confider- 
able  damage  to  the  Colonies  of  Canada,  that  fubfift  only  as 
one  may  fay,  by  the  trade  of  Skins,  as  I  fhall  fhew  you  more 


to  iVo;tZ>- America.  281 

particularly  in  a  proper  place.  The  Euglifli  will  by  no  means 
take  it  ill,  that  we  do  not  build  thefe  Forts,  for  befides  that, 
they  are  too  much  concern'd  for  the  prefervation  of  the 
Iroquefc,  they  will  always  be  ready  to  furnifh  with  Merchandize 
the  Savage  Nations,  that  are  our  Allies,  as  they  have  done 
hitherto.  I  muft  own  my  felf  mightily  oblig'd  to  the  EngUjh, 
who  attack'd  us  at  Placentia  the  laft  year ;  they  declar'd  pub- 
lickly,  though  without  any  juft  ground,  after  they  arriv'd  in 
England,  that  they  would  infallibly  have  taken  that  place,  if  I 
had  not  oppos'd  their  Defcent.  I  have  already  inform'd  you, 
that  I  did  not  at  all  hinder  them  from  Landing  at  the  place 
where  I  was  polled  with  fixty  Bifcayan  Seamen :  So  that  they 
attribute  to  me  a  glorious  Adion,  in  which  I  had  no  fhare, 
and  by  that  means  have  done  me  fo  much  Honour,  that  his 
Majefty  hath  beftow'd  upon  me  the  Lieutenancy  of  the  Ifle  of 
Newfound-Land  and  Acadia,  which  I  never  deferv'd  upon  that 
fcore.  Thus  you  fee.  Sir,  that  many  times  fuch  Perfons  are 
preferr'd,  who  have  no  other  Patrons  in  the  World,  but  pure 
Chance.  However,  I  fhould  have  been  better  pleas'd,  if  I 
could  have  put  the  abovemention'd  Projedl  in  execution,  for 
a  folitary  Life  is  moft  grateful  to  me,  and  the  manners  of  the 
Savages  are  perfedly  agreeable  to  my  Palate.  The  corrup- 
tion of  our  Age  is  fo  great,  that  it  feems  the  Europeans  have 
made  a  Law,  to  tear  one  another  in  pieces  by  cruel  Ufage  and 
Reproaches,  and  therefore  you  muft  not  think  it  ftrange,  if  I 
have  a  kindnefs  for  the  poor  Americans,  who  have  done  me  fo 
many  favours.  I  am  to  fet  out  the  next  day  after  to  Morrow, 
from  this  [189]  place,  in  order  to  embark  at  St.  Nazere.    The 


282  Some  New  Voyages 

Mejfieurs  d'Angui,  two  Nantes  Merchants,  have  taken  upon 
them  to  maintain  the  Garrifon  of  Placenlia,  upon  condition  of 
certain  Grants  made  by  the  Court,  who  furnifhes  them  with  a 
Ship,  wherein  I  am  to  have  my  Paffage.  Pray  fend  me  your 
News  by  fome  Ships  of  S.  John  de  Luz,  which  are  to  fail  from 
this  place  within  two  Months,  in  order  to  truck  with  the 
Inhabitants  of  Placentia. 

I  cannot  conclude  this  Letter,  without  giving  you  fome 
account  of  a  Difpute  I  had  very  lately  at  my  Inn,  with  a 
Portugueze  Phyfician,  who  had  made  many  Voyages  to  Angola^ 
Brezil,  and  Goa.  He  maintain'd,  that  the  People  of  the  Con- 
tinent of  America,  Afia,  and  Africa,  were  defcended  from  three 
different  Fathers,  which  he  thus  attempted  to  prove.  The 
Americans  differ  from  the  Afiatics,  for  they  have  neither  Hair 
nor  Beard ;  the  features  of  their  Face,  their  colour  and  their 
cuftoms  are  different;  befi-des  that,  they  know  neither  meum 
nor  tuum,  but  have  all  things  in  common,  without  making  any 
property  of  Goods,  which  is  quite  contrary  to  the  Afiatic  way 
of  living.  He  added,  that  America  was  fo  far  diftant  from  the 
other  parts  of  the  World,  that  no  body  can  imagine,  how  a 
Voyage  fhould  be  made  into  this  New  Continent,  before  the 
ufe  of  the  Compafs  was  found  out ;  That  the  Africans  being 
black  and  flat  Nos'd,  had  fuch  monftrous  thick  Lips,  fuch  a 
flat  Face,  fuch  foft  woolly  Hair  on  their  Head,  and  were  in 
their  Conftitution,  Manners,  and  Temper,  fo  different  from 
the  Americans,  that  he  thought  it  impoflible,  that  thefe  two 
forts  of  People  fhould  derive  their  Original  homAda?n,  whom 
this  Phyfician  would  have  to  refemble  a  Turk  or  a  Perfian  in  his 


to  Nortb-Kvcitncdi.  283 

Air  and  Figure.  I  anfwer'd  him  prefently,  that  fuppofing  the 
Scripture  did  not  give  convincing  evidence,  that  all  Men  in 
general  are  defcended  from  one  firft  Father,  yet  his  reafoning 
would  not  be  fufficient  [190]  to  prove  the  contrary,  fince  the 
difference  that  is  found  between  the  People  of  America  and 
Africa^  proceeds  from  no  other  caufe  but  the  different  qual- 
ities of  the  Air  and  Climat  in  thefe  two  Continents  :  That 
this  appears  plainly  to  be  true,  becaufe  a  Negro  Man  and 
Woman,  or  a  Savage  Man  and  Woman,  being  tranfplanted 
into  Europe^  will  produce  fuch  Children  there,  who  in  four  or 
five  Generations,  will  infallibly  be  as  white,  as  the  moft  ancient 
Europeans.  The  Phyfician  deny'd  this  matter  of  Fad,  and 
maintain'd,  that  the  Children  defcended  from  this  Negro  Man 
or  Woman,  would  be  born  there  as  black  as  they  are  in 
Guinea  ;  but  that  afterwards  the  Rays  of  the  Sun  being  more 
oblique  and  lefs  fcorching  than  in  Africa^  thefe  Infants  would 
not  have  that  black  fhining  Luftre,  which  is  fo  eafily  diftin- 
guifhed  upon  the  Skin  of  fuch  Negroes  as  are  brought  up  in 
their  own  Country.  To  confirm  his  Hypothefis^  he  affur'd  me, 
that  he  had  feen  many  Negroes  at  Lisbon^  as  black  as  in  Africa^ 
tho'  their  Great  Grandfather's  Grandfather  had  been  tranf- 
planted into  Portugal  many  years  agoe.  He  added  alfo,  that 
thofe  who  were  defcended  from  the  Portugueze,  that  dwelt  at 
Angola,  Cape  Fert,  (3'g.  about  a  hundred  years  agoe,  are  fo 
little  tawn'd,  that  'tis  impolTible  to  diftinguifh  them  from  the 
Natives  oi  Portugal :  He  further  confirm'd  his  way  of  reafon- 
ing, from  an  unconteftable  matter  of  fad,  for,  fays  he,  if  the 
Rays  of  the  Sun  were  the  caufe  of  the  blacknefs  of  the  Negroes, 


284  Some  New  Voyages 

from  hence  it  would  follow,  that  the  Brazilians  being  fituate 
in  the  fame  degree  from  the  Equator  with  the  Africans^  fhould 
be  as  black  as  they  are  ;  but  fo  they  are  not,  for  'tis  certain 
their  Skin  appears  to  be  as  clear  as  that  of  the  Portuguefe. 
But  this  was  not  all,  he  maintain'd  farther,  that  thefe  who  are 
defcended  from  the  firft  Savages  of  Brazil^  that  were  tranf- 
ported  into  Portugal^  above  an  Age  agoe,  have  as  little  Hair 
and  [191]  Beard  as  their  Anceftors,  and  on  the  contrary,  thofe 
who  are  defcended  from  the  firft  Portiigueze,  who  peopl'd  the 
Colonies  of  Brazil,  are  as  hairy,  and  have  as  great  Beards,  as 
if  they  had  been  born  in  Portugal.  But  after  all,  continued 
he,  though  all  that  I  have  faid  is  abfolutely  true,  yet  there  are 
fome  People,  who  rafhly  maintain,  that  the  Children  of  the 
Africans  and  Americans,  will  by  degrees  degenerate  in  Europe. 
This  may  happen  to  thofe  whofe  Mothers  receive  the  im- 
braces  of  Europeans,  which  is  the  reafon  why  we  fee  fo  many 
Mullaito^s  in  the  Ifles  of  America,  in  Spain,  and  in  Portugal: 
Whereas  if  thefe  Women  had  been  as  clofely  kept  up  in  Eu- 
rope, as  the  Portugueze  Women  are  in  Africa  and  America,  the 
Children  of  the  Brafilians  would  no  more  degenerate  than 
thofe  of  the  Portugueze.  Such  Sir,  was  the  reafoning  of  this 
Do6lor,  who  hits  the  matter  pretty  juftly  towards  the  end  of 
his  Difcourfe ;  but  his  Principle  is  moft  falfe,  and  moft  abfurd, 
for  no  Man  can  doubt,  unlefs  he  be  void  of  Faith,  good  Senfe 
and  Judgment,  but  t\\?it  Adam  was  the  only  Father  of  all  Man- 
kind. 'Tis  certain,  that  the  Savages  of  Canada,  and  all  the 
other  People  of  America,  have  not  naturally  either  Hair  or 
Beard ;  that  the  features  of  their  Face,  and  their  colour  ap- 


1 

'G-X*-A.XJiC    in  uHch  zoo  ttun.  may  rcfw; 
iettilek  ynffjAt  drew  io^  nu  upany3arks  afTreAj  . 


'-^ffil  miJh  h€  ijo  Jwyt  tona  jrom  the  T7rot*>  to  tke  Jtern. . 


^ 


Vol  i.pj-a 

ThtXhallm^   ■RoxxCeiofiht    TA.¥l\IGX,A\!T!l  .u^ij,  art  3t>  poM  in  Unfhth 


Tht-VeCCeli    ujd  tjr  t/u  TAHUCL  AtTK.    m  ««<A  zoo  ,nm  rruty  r 
nravidtA.  tkty  artjluh  ajjhtnafy  Mox  eeznlcL.  ^cpU  drew  1o  rru  upimJSarkj  fffTri 


to  North-A.vc\tv\c2i,  285 

preaching  to  an  Olive,  fhow  a  vaft  difference  between  them 
and  the  Europeans.  What  is  the  caufe  of  thefe  things  I  know 
not,  and  yet  I  cannot  believe  them  to  be  the  effe6l  of  their  Air 
and  Food.  For  at  that  rate,  thofe  who  are  defcended  from 
the  French,  that  firft  fetled  in  Canada  near  a  hundred  years 
agoe,  and  for  the  moft  part  run  up  and  down  in  the  Woods, 
and  live  like  the  Savages,  fhould  have  neither  Beard  nor  Hair, 
but  degenerate  alfo  by  degrees  Into  Savages,  which  yet  never 
happens.  After  this  Phyfician  had  alledg'd  all  thefe  Reafons, 
he  digrefs'd  from  this  Subje6l,  and  having  a  mind  to  difcover 
his  extravagant  Opinions,  ask'd  me  what  I  [192]  thought  of 
the  Salvation  of  fo  many  Americans,  to  whom  in  all  probability 
the  Gofpel  was  never  preach'd.  You  may  very  well  believe, 
that  I  made  no  fcruple  to  condemn  them  by  wholefale  to 
Eternal  Fire,  which  he  took  very  111.  '  How  can  you,  faid  he, 
'  condemn  thefe  poor  People  with  fo  much  affurance :  'Tis 
'  probable  that  their  firft  Father,  having  never  finn'd  as  our 
'■Adam  did,  had  a  good  Soul,  and  an  upright  Heart,  fince  his 

*  Pofterity  do  exadlly  obferve  the  Law  of  natural  Equity, 
'  which  Is  exprefs'd  In  Latine  In  thefe  well  known  words,  Allcri 

*  ne  feceris  quod  tibi  fieri  non  vis  ;  and  allow  no  property  of 
'  Goods,  nor  any  Diftlndtlon  or  Subordination  among  them, 
'  but  live  as  Brethren,  without  Difputes,  without  Suits,  with- 
'  out  Laws,  and  without  Malice.     But  fuppofing,  added  he, 

*  that  they  were  originally  defcended  from  Adam,  we  ought 
'  not  to  believe,  that  they  are  damn'd  for  their  Ignorance  of 

*  the  Chrlftian  Dodtrine,  for  who  can  tell  but  God  may  impute 
'to  them  the  Merits  of  Chrift's  Blood,  by  ways  fecret  and 


286  Some  New  Voyages 

'  incomprehenfible  to  us;  and  befides,  (fuppofing  that  Man 
'  has  a  Free  Will)  his  Divine  Majefty  without  doubt  will  have 
'  a  greater  regard  to  his  moral  Adlions,  than  to  his  Worfhip 
'  and  Belief.  The  want  of  Knowledge,  continued  he,  is  an 
'  Unhappinefs,  but  not  a  Crime,  and  who  can  tell  but  God  has 
'  a  mind  to  be  honoured  by  infinite  ways  of  paying  him  Hom- 
'  age  and  Refpedl,  as  by  Sacriiices,  Dances,  Songs,  and  the 
'other  Ceremonies  of  tho.  Americans?  He  had  fcarce  made 
an  end  of  his  Difcourfe,  when  I  fell  foul  upon  him  with  all  my 
might,  as  to  the  preceding  Points ;  but  after  I  had  given  him 
to  underftand,  that  if  among  the  muld  vocati,  i.  e.  thofe  v/ho 
profefs  the  true  Religion,  who  are  but  a  handful  of  Men,  there 
are  found  but  Pauci  eleEfi,  all  the  Americans  muft  be  in  a  very 
deplorable  condition  :  He  anfwer'd  me  Impudently,  that  I  was 
very  rafh  [193]  to  determine  who  fhould  be  in  the  number  of 
the  Reprobate  at  the  laft  Judgment,  and  to  condemn  them 
without  giving  any  Quarter ;  for,  fays  he,  this  is  to  infult  the 
Wifdom  of  God,  and  to  make  him  deal  as  capricioufly  by  his 
Creatures,  as  St.  PauPs  Potter  did  by  his  two  Veffels.  Never- 
thelefs,  when  he  faw  that  I  treated  him  like  an  impious,  unbe- 
lieving Wretch,  he  to  be  even  with  me,  reply'd  in  thefe  foolifh 
words,  Fidem  ego  hie  qua  adhibetur  Myfteriis  Jacris  interpello,  fed 
fidemillam  qua  bona  mentis  foror  eji,  qiiaq  ;  reSlam  rationem  amat. 
From  hence  you  may  judge,  Sir,  whether  this  fine  Phyfician 
was  able  to  remove  Mountains.     I  am, 

SIR, 

Tours,  &c. 


to  North- AATimcdi,  287 


LETTER    XXV. 

Dated  at  Viana  In  Portugal  January  31.  1694. 
The  Author's  departure  from  France  for  Placentia.  A  Fleet  of 
30  Englifli  Ships  came  to  feize  upon  that  place;  but  is  dif- 
appointed^  and  fheers  off.  The  Reafons  why  the  Englifli  have 
bad  fuccefs  in  all  their  Enterprifes  beyond  Sea.  The  Author's 
Adventure  with  the  Governour  of  Placentia.  His  departure  for 
Portugal.     An  Engagement  zvith  a  Flufliing  Privateer. 

SIR, 

I  DO  not  at  all  doubt  but  you  will  be  fenfibly  affedled  with 
my  fad  and  fatal  Mifadventure,  which  I  am  now  to  give  you 
an  account  of.  And  firft  [194]  you  muft  know,  that  after  we 
had  waited  for  a  fair  Wind  fifteen  or  twenty  days  at  St.  Nazere, 
we  fet  fail  on  the  12th  of  May  laft.  Our  FafTage  was  neither 
long  nor  fhort,  for  we  arriv'd  at  the  Harbour  of  Placentia  the 
20th  of  June^  having  taken  an  Englifli  Ship  laden  with  Tobacco, 
on  the  edges  of  the  Bank  of  Newfound  Land.  After  I  landed, 
I  went  to  falute  Mr.  B?'ouillon,  Governor  of  Placentia,  and 
declar'd  to  him  how  glad  I  was  to  obey  the  Orders  of  fo  wife 
a  Commander.^     He  anfwer'd,  that  he  was   much  furpriz'd 


^  Jacques  Franfois  de  Brouillon  belonged  to  a  good  family  from  Guienne,  France, 
and  had  served  as  an  infantry  officer  since  1670.  Twenty  years  later  he  was  honored 
with  the  appointment  of  governor  of  Placentia,  where  he  arrived  early  in  the  spring 
of  1690.     He  was  an  officer  of  merit,  but  inclined  to  peculation,  and  bolh  merchants 


288  Some  New  Voyages 

to  find,  that  I  had  follicited  to  be  employ'd  there,  without 
acquainting  him  with  it  the  preceding  year ;  and  that  he  now 
plainly  perceiv'd,  that  the  Projed  about  the  Lakes  of  Canada^ 
(which  I  had  mention'd  to  him)  was  a  mere  (ham  pretence. 
I  endeavour'd  in  vain  to  perfwade  him  to  the  contrary ;  for 
it  was  not  pofTible  for  me  to  undeceive  him.^  Neverthelefs,  I 
landed  my  Goods,  and  hir'd  a  private  Houfe,  till  fuch  time  as 
I  could  build  one  for  my  felf,  which  I  carried  on  with  fo  much 
diligence,  that  it  was  finifh'd  in  September,  by  the  affiftance  of 
the  Ship-Carpenters,  who  were  lent  me  gratis,  by  all  the  Bifcay 
Captains.  The  Sieur  Beray  of  St.  John  de  Lnz^  arriv'd  at  Pla- 
centia  on  the  \%th  of  July,  with  one  of  his  Ships,  and  brought 
me  a  Letter,  wherein  you  acquaint  me,  that  in  regard  to  your 
Nephew  defires  to  vifit  Canada  the  next  year,  you  would  be 
very  glad  to  have  a  Didionary  of  the  Language  of  the  Sav- 
ages, together  with  the  Memoirs  which  I  promis'd  you. 

On  the  \^th  of  September  we  perceiv'd  an  Engl'ijh  Fleet  of 
twenty  four  Sail,  which  caft  Anchor  in  the  Road  much  about 
the  time  that  it  was  difcover'd.  It  was  commanded  by  Sir 
Francis  Wheeler,  who   had   gone  to  Martinico  with  a  defign 


and  habitants  made  frequent  complaints  under  his  administration.  He  remained  in 
Placentia  until  1701,  when  he  was  transferred  to  Acadia,  serving  there  as  governor 
until  his  death  in  1705.  Indications  are  not  lacking  from  official  sources  that 
Lahontan's  accusations  against  De  Brouillon  had  some  justification.  See  Roy, 
Lahontan,  pp.  176-179.  —  Ed. 

1  Roy  shows  from  the  letters  of  De  Brouillon  himself,  that  the  arrival  of  Lahontan 
in  the  capacity  of  lieutenant  of  the  king,  not  only  deprived  the  governor  of  certain 
sources  of  profit,  but  also  of  hopes  for  placing  his  brother  in  that  position.  —  Ed. 

2  St.  Jean  de  Luz  is  a  small  port  at  the  southwestern  extremity  of  France  on  the 
Bay  of  Biscay.    It  had  considerable  commerce  with  Placentia  and  its  fisheries.  —  Ed. 


to  North-Kvn^nc2i,  289 

to  feize  that  Ifle,  and  in  his  return  from  thence  had  fail'd 
to  New  England^  to  take  in  fome  Forces  and  Ammunition 
there,  in  order  to  make  himfelf  Mafter  [195]  of  Placentia  ; 
but  when  he  difcover'd  a  Redoubt  of  Stone  lately  built  upon 
the  top  of  the  Mountain,  which  I  mention'd  to  you  in  my 
laft  Letter  but  one,  he  thought  it  more  advifable  to  return 
quietly  into  Europe^  than  to  make  a  fruitlefs  Attempt.  We 
had  planted  four  Canon  upon  this  high  Redoubt,  which  fo 
gaul'd  the  Ships  of  his  Fleet,  that  they  were  forc'd  to  weigh 
Anchor,  and  hoift  Sail  fooner  than  they  intended.^  The  fault 
of  the  Engli/Ji  upon  this  occafion,  was,  that  they  did  not  enter 
the  Harbour  the  fame  day  that  they  appear'd  before  the 
place.  I  have  obferv'd  it  many  times,  that  Attempts  do  com- 
monly mifcarry,  by  delaying  them  for  a  little  while  ;  and  of 
this  I  could  give  you  at  leaft  fifteen  or  fixteen  Inftances  within 
the  compafs  of  my  own  Knowledge.  But  now  I  return  to  the 
Quarrel  the  Governour  had  with  me. 

Fancying  that  I  had  follicited  my  Employments  without 
taking  notice  of  him,  he  treated  me  with  all  manner  of  Re- 
proaches and  Outrages,  from  the  time  of  my  Landing,  to 
that  of  my  Departure,  and  was  not  fatisfy'd  with  appropriat- 


^  Sir  Francis  Wheler,  born  in  1656,  entered  the  navy  when  twenty-two  years  of 
age,  and  by  1680  was  captain  of  a  man  of  war.  The  following  year  he  captured  two 
Algerine  corsairs,  and  was  knighted  by  James  II  in  the  last  year  of  his  reign.  After 
the  Revolution  (1688)  Wheler  was  made  rear-admiral  and  sent  with  a  squadron  to 
the  West  Indies.  There  he  made  an  unsuccessful  attack  on  Martinique  (April,  1692) , 
and  arrived  in  Boston  June  10,  where  he  requested  Phips  to  cooperate  in  a  second 
attack  upon  Quebec.  Finding  that  impracticable,  he  sailed  for  Placentia,  with  the 
results  Lahontan  details.  The  following  year  (1694)  his  flag  ship  foundered  off  the 
coast  of  Gibralter,  and  the  admiral,  with  all  on  board,  was  lost.  — Ed. 
19 


290  Some  New  Voyages 

ing  to  himfelf  the  Profits  and  Advantages  of  the  free  Com- 
pany that  was  given  me,  but  likewife  ftop'd  without  any 
fcruple,  the  pay  of  the  Soldiers  that  were  employ'd  in  the 
Cod-fifhing  by  the  Inhabitants,  and  made  the  reft  work  with- 
out Wages.  I  fhall  take  no  notice  of  his  publick  Extortion ; 
for  tho'  he  has  formally  counteraded  the  ten  Articles  con- 
tain'd  in  the  Orders  of  Lewis  the  10th  y  yet  he  had  fo  many 
Friends  in  all  the  Courts,  that  he  could  not  be  found  guilty : 
There's  fome  pleafure  in  making  Prefents  in  his  way,  for  by 
them  he  has  made  50000  Crowns  per  fas  &  nefas,  in  the  fpace 
of  three  or  four  years.  I  fhould  never  have  done,  if  I  offer'd 
to  give  you  a  particular  account  of  all  the  trouble  and  vexa- 
tion he  gave  me.  I  fhall  only  mention  three  Inftances  which 
crown'd  all  the  reft. 

[196]  On  the  20th  of  November,  i.  e.  a  Month  after  our 
Fifhermen  fet  fail,  while  I  was  entertaining  at  Supper  fome  of 
the  Inhabitants,  he  came  Mask'd  into  my  Houfe,  with  his 
Servants,  and  broke  the  glafs  Windows,  Bottles,  and  Drink- 
ing-Glaffes,  and  threw  down  the  Tables,  Chairs,  Chefts  of 
Drawers,  and  every  thing  that  came  to  hand.  Before  I  had 
time  to  get  into  my  Chamber,  and  take  my  Piftols,  this  info- 
lent  Mob  difappear'd  very  feafonably;  for  I  would  have  loaded 
my  Piftols  and  purfu'd  them,  if  my  Guefts  had  not  hindred 
me.  Next  Morning  his  Servants  fell  upon  mine,  who  expe6led 
nothing  lefs  than  to  be  threfh'd  to  death  with  Clubs.  This 
fecond  infult  having  provok'd  my  Patience  to  the  laft  degree, 
I  was  meditating  fome  Revenge  upon  thefe  AfTaflins,  when  the 
Recollets  came  and  remonftrated  to  me,  that  I  muft  difTem- 


to  iV<?r^/6- America.  291 

ble  my  Refentment,  to  prevent  any  Innovation  in  the  King's 
Affairs.  Then  I  refolv'd  to  fhut  my  felf  up,  and  apply  my 
felf  to  Study,  to  divert  the  vexatious  Thoughts,  of  not  being 
able  to  pull  off  my  Mask.  The  third  trick  which  he  play'd 
me,  at  the  end  of  three  days,  was  this;  he  fent  to  arreft  two 
Soldiers,  whom  I  had  imploy'd  to  cut  down  fome  Grafs  in  the 
Meadows,  about  half  a  League  from  the  Garrifon :  They 
were  feiz'd  while  they  were  Mowing,  bound  and  carried  away 
Prifoners,  under  the  pretence  of  being  Deferters,  becaufe  they 
had  lain  two  Nights  out  of  the  Garrifon,  without  his  leave  ; 
and,  which  would  have  prov'd  yet  more  fatal  to  thefe  innocent 
Men,  he  had  certainly  caus'd  'em  to  be  knock'd  on  the  Head, 
on  purpofe  to  vex  me,  if  the  Recollets,  and  his  own  Miffse, 
had  not  earneftly  interceded  on  their  behalf. 

After  this  Accident,  the  Recollets  advifed  me  to  go  and 
fee  him,  and  to  entreat  him  to  put  an  end  to  all  his  Perfecu- 
tions,  affuring  him  at  the  fame  time,  that  I  was  entirely  his 
Servant  and  Friend.  Diiriis  eft  hie  fermo.  Whatever  reludancy 
I  had  to  yield  to  an  advice  fo  [197]  contrary  to  nature,  which, 
I  muft  confefs,  ftruggled  furioufly  within  me,  yet  I  offer'd  fo 
much  violence  to  my  felf,  that  I  fubmitted  to  it.  I  was  at  his 
Houfe,  went  into  his  Chamber,  and  being  with  him  all  alone, 
I  fpoke  to  him  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  in  the  moft  fubmiflive 
Terms,  that  any  Slave  could  ufe.  I  am  afham'd  to  make  this 
Confeflion  to  you,  for  I  blufh  to  my  felf  every  time  I  think  of 
fo  mean  a  fubmifTion.  However,  inftead  of  his  liftening  to  my 
Reafons,  and  treating  friendly  with  me,  he  fell  into  a  moft 
furious  Paffion,  and  loaded  me  with  a  torrent  of  moft  bitter 


292  Some  New  Voyages 

Reproaches.  In  this  cafe,  Sir,  I  preferr'd  the  Service  of  the 
King,  before  the  Pun6liHo's  of  Honour,  for  I  did  nothing  but 
retir'd  to  my  own  Houfe,  being  well  fatisfy'd  that  I  was  not 
affafTinated  by  his  Domefticks  :  But  the  diforder  which  this 
Affair  produc'd,  would  require  a  long  Difcourfe.  It  will  be 
more  to  the  purpofe,  to  come  to  matter  of  Fadl ;  I  do  affure 
you,  that  he  would  have  laid  me  up,  if  the  Inhabitants  had 
appear'd  to  be  in  his  Intereft.  He  pretended  that  he  had 
been  infulted,  and  confequently  that  he  was  in  the  right  in 
revenging  himfelf,  whatever  it  coft  him.  But  the  tragical  end 
of  a  Governour,  whofe  Throat  was  cut  in  this  Country  about 
thirty  or  forty  years  agoe,  furnifh'd  him  with  abundant  matter 
of  Reflexion.  He  judg'd  it  therefore  his  fafeft  way  to  diffem- 
ble  his  Anger,  being  perfwaded,  that  if  I  fhould  have  run  him 
through  with  my  Sword,  the  Soldiers  and  Inhabitants  would 
have  favour'd  my  efcape  to  the  Engli/h,  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Placentia.  In  the  mean  time  the  Recollets,  who  had  a  mind 
to  compofe  thefe  growing  Differences,  found  no  great  trouble 
in  reconciling  us,  for  they  Remonflrated  to  him,  of  what  con- 
fequence  it  would  be  for  us  to  live  in  a  good  Correfpondence, 
and  to  avoid  the  troubles  that  would  enfue  upon  our  quarrels. 
This  propofal  of  an  Accomodation,  was  in  appearance  [198] 
moft  agreeable  to  him,  and  fo  much  the  rather,  becaufe  he 
was  glad  to  diffemble  his  Refentments  by  the  external  figns  of 
Friendfhip.  So  we  faw  and  embrac'd  one  another  with  mutual 
Proteftations  of  forgetting  all  that  had  pafs'd  between  us. 
After  this   Reconciliation,  I  had  reafon  to  believe,  that 


1 


to  North- A.mtv\c3.,  293 

his  Heart  would  not  give  the  lye  to  his  Mouth,  becaufe  I 
thought  he  was  not  fo  imprudent  as  to  inform  the  Court  of 
fome  Trifles,  wherein  he  would  appear  to  have  proftituted  his 
Honour;  but  I  was  deceiv'd,  for  he  took  the  pains  to  add 
afterwards  to  the  Verbal  Procefs  he  had  given  in  before  our 
Accommodation,  fome  falHioods  which  he  ought  to  have  con- 
ceal'd.  'Tis  needlefs  to  acquaint  you,  how  by  chance  his 
Papers  fell  into  my  Hands  ;  that  Indifcretion  might  prove  a 
difadvantage  to  fome  Perfons,  whom  Heaven  blefs.  I  fhall 
only  tell  you,  that  after  the  Recollets  had  feen  and  read  the 
Allegations  contain'd  in  his  Papers,  they  made  no  fcruple  to 
advife  me  to  take  care  of  my  felf,  and  ingeneoufly  declar'd 
to  me,  that  they  never  intended  to  meddle  any  more  in  that 
Affair,  becaufe  they  perceiv'd  that  they  had  innocently  con- 
tributed to  do  me  a  prejudice,  by  reftoring  peace  between  him 
and  me.^  This  wholfom  advice  made  me  perceive  the  danger 
to  which  I  fhould  be  expos'd,  if  I  continued  any  longer  at 
Placentia,  infomuch,  that  the  fear  I  had  of  being  fent  to  the 
BaftiUy  after  the  arrival  of  the  Ships  from  France^  made  me 
refolve  to  abandon  all  hopes  of  making  my  fortune  here,  and 
to  throw  up  my  Places.  After  the  Inhabitants  were  acquainted 
with  this  News,  all  of  'em  except  three  or  four,  came  running 
to  my  Houfe,  to  affure  me  they  were  ready  to  fign  my  Verbal 

^  For  copies  of  De  Brouillon's  accusations  against  his  lieutenant,  taken  from  the 
French  archives,  see  Roy,  Lahontan,  pp.  loo,  loi.  It  is  amusing  reading,  as  cuie 
recognizes  the  unpopularity  of  the  governor  with  the  inhabitants,  and  the  mocking 
spirit  of  Lahontan  who  composed  satiric  songs  concerning  his  superior,  and  sang 
them  in  the  taverns  of  Placentia.  —  Ed. 


294  Some  New  Voyages 

Procefs,  in  cafe  I  would  change  my  Refolution :  But  inftead 
of  accepting  their  offer,  I  gave  them  to  underftand,  having 
thank'd  them  firft  for  their  Good-will,  that  [199]  they  would 
bring  Mifchief  upon  themfelves,  and  be  look'd  upon  at  Court 
as  Seditious  Perfons,  and  Difiiurbers  of  the  publick  Peace; 
fince  by  a  deteftable  principle  of  Politicks,  an  inferior  Perfon 
is  always  judg'd  to  be  in  the  wrong,  whatever  reafon  he  may 
have  on  his  fide.     Indeed  I  would  gladly  have  avoided  this 
fatal  neceffity  of  throwing  up  my  Places,  which  feem'd  infenfi- 
bly  to  lead  me  to  fome  great  Fortune ;  but  at  laft  the  confine- 
ment in  the  Baftile,  made   fuch  a  deep   impreffion  upon  my 
Mind,   after  I   had  ferioufly  refledled  upon  the  troublefom 
Circumftances  of  my  Affairs,  that  I  made  no  fcruple  to  embark 
in  a  little  Veffel,  which  was  the  only  one,  and  the  laft  that  was 
to  go  to  France.      The  Propofal  I  made  to  the  Captain  of 
prefenting  him  with  a  1000  Crowns,  was  fo  well  receiv'd,  that 
he  engag'd  to  land  me  upon  the  Coaft  of  Portugal  for  that 
Sum,  upon  condition  that  I  fhould  keep  the  Secret.     The  beft 
of  the  matter  was,  that  my  Enemy  had  ufed  the  precaution  of 
writing  to  the  Governors  of  Belle  Ifle,  of  the  Ifle  of  Re,  and  of 
Rochelle,  to  feize  me  as  foon  as  I  fhould  land.^     He  reckon'd, 
and  not  without  reafon  indeed,  that  this  Veffel  would  put  into 
one  of  thefe  three  Ports  :  But  three  hundred  Piftoles,  dexter- 
oufly  convey'd  to  the  hands  of  fome  People  that  are  not  much 

1  Three  well-known  harbors  on  the  west  coast  of  France.  Belle  Isle  lies  off  from 
Britanny  opposite  the  hay  of  Quiberon  ;  Isle  de  Re  is  over  against  the  harbor  of  La 
Rochelle  in  the  Bay  of  Biscay.  —  Ed. 


to  North'Kmtnc^i,  295 

accuftom'd  to  finger  Gold,  have  a  wonderful  effedl ;  for  that 
very  Sum,  which  indeed  I  was  loth  to  part  with,  fav'd  me  my 
Liberty,  and  perhaps  my  Life. 

Purfuant  to  this  Refolution,  I  imbarqu'd  the  14//:?  of  the 
laft  Month,  notwithftanding  the  rifque  that  one  runs  by  fail- 
ing in  the  Winter  time,  through  fuch  a  Sea  as  lies  between 
Newfoimd-Land  and  France.  'Tis  needlefs  to  inform  you,  that 
I  left  at  Placentia  a  great  deal  of  Houfhold  Furniture,  which  I 
could  neither  fell  nor  carry  off.  'Twill  be  more  edifying  for 
you  to  hear  the  Journal  of  our  Voyage.  We  incounter'd  three 
terrible  Storms  in  our  PaiTage,  [200]  without  any  damage; 
and  in  the  hift  of  thefe,  which  lafted  three  days,  the  Wind  at 
North-Weft,  we  run  a  hundred  and  fifty  Leagues  without  any 
Sail.  This  laft  Storm  was  fo  violent,  that  the  Seamen  imbrac'd, 
and  bid  an  eternal  adieu  to  one  another ;  for  every  Minute 
they  expedted  to  be  funk  without  relief.  As  this  Storm  alarm'd 
us,  fo  the  contrary  Winds  from  the  Eaft  and  North-Eaft,  that 
fprung  upon  us  a  hundred  Leagues  to  the  Weftward  of  Cape 
Finijlerre^  occafion'd  an  equal  dread  ;  for  we  were  oblig'd  to 
traverfe  the  Sea  for  three  or  four  and  twenty  days,  after  which 
we  defcry'd  the  Cape  by  vertue  of  our  frequent  tackings,  and 
by  a  ftrange  accident,  were  attack'd  by  a  Fliijliiug  Privateer, 
which  could  not  board  us,  becaufe  the  Sea  roll'd  fo  high,  but 
contented  her  felf  with  firing  upon  us,  and  that  with  fo  little 
effe6l,  that  we  did  not  lofe  one  Man.  Our  Mafts  and  Rigging 
indeed  was  fo  dammag'd,  that  after  we  were  parted  from  the 
Privateer,  by  the  help  of  the  Night  and  a  great  Fog,  we  could 


296  Some  New  Voyages 

fcarce  make  ufe  of  our  Sails.  However,  we  refitted  with  all 
pofTible  diligence,  and  the  Captain  of  the  Ship  having  then  a 
fair  pretence  to  luft  out  of  the  diredt  courfe  flood  to  the  South- 
Eaft  in  the  Night-time.  This  feign'd  courfe  did  not  fecure  us 
from  the  Privateer,  which  might  happen  to  fteer  the  fame 
courfe ;  fo  that  in  the  Night-time  we  put  our  felves  in  a  readi- 
nefs  to  renew  the  fight  in  the  Day-time.  In  eflFedl,  he  did  not 
purfue  us,  as  we  apprehended :  But  about  Noon  we  efcap'd 
yet  more  narrowly,  for  we  were  purfu'd  by  a  Sallyman'^  in  fight 
of  the  Coaft  for  four  hours,  and  were  within  a  hairs  breadth 
of  being  taken,  before  we  got  under  the  Canon  of  the  Fort 
of  this  City.  Had  we  been  catch'd,  the  Governour  oi  Placentia 
would  have  had  fome  ground  for  the  joyful  Exclamation,  Incidit 
in  Scillam,  &c.     But  thank  God  we  were  only  frighted. 

[201]  As  foon  as  we  came  to  an  Anchor,  I  paid  down  my 
1000  Crowns  to  the  Captain,  who  has  reafon  to  look  upon  this 
Adlion,  as  one  of  the  beft  he  ever  did  in  his  Life-time.  The 
Long-boat  was  no  fooner  in  the  Water,  than  I  went  afhoar 
with  all  my  Baggage;  and  as  foon  as  I  came  into  this  City,  I 
procur'd  Ammunition  and  Provifions  for  the  Ship  with  that 
Expedition,  that  the  Captain  weigh'd  Anchor  the  very  next 
day,  and  fo  continu'd  his  courfe  to  France. 

As  for  the  Memoirs  of  the  Country  of  Canada^  which  you 
have  fo  often  defir'd,  I  have  addrefs'd  'em  to  the  Rochel  Mer- 
chant, who  convey'd  your  Letters  to  me  all  the  while  I  was  in 


^  A  Salleeman  was  a  Moorish  pirate  ship,  so  called  from  the  port  of  Sallee  on  the 
coast  of  Morocco.  —  Ed. 


to  North'A.mmc?i,  297 

Canada.  To  thefe  I  have  tack'd  a  fmall  Catalogue  of  the  moft 
neceffary  words  of  the  Algonkin  Language ;  which,  as  I  have 
often  told  you,  is  the  fineft  and  the  moft  univerfal  Language 
in  that  Continent.  If  your  Nephew  continues  his  defign  of 
undertaking  a  Voyage  to  that  Country,  I  would  advife  him  to 
learn  thefe  words  in  the  time  of  his  Paffage,  that  fo  he  may  be 
able  to  ftay  five  or  fix  Months  with  the  Algonkins^  and  under- 
fliand  what  they  fay.  I  have  likewife  fent  you  an  explication 
of  the  Sea-Terms,  made  ufe  of  in  my  Letters.  The  making 
of  this  little  Table,  was  a  diverfion  to  me  in  my  Voyage ;  for 
in  perufing  my  Letters,  I  drew  out  fome  remarks  which  I 
defign  to  impart  to  you,  if  I  find  that  the  infuing  Memoirs 
give  you  fatisfadion. 

You  will  readily  guefs,  that  from  the  year  1683,  to  this 
very  day,  I  have  renounc'd  all  manner  of  ties  to  my  Country. 
The  curious  Adventures  that  I  have  related  to  you  in  Writing 
fince  that  time,  will  undoubtedly  afford  an  agreeable  diverfion 
to  your  Friends ;  provided  they  are  not  of  the  number  of  thofe 
unfufferable  Devotees,  who  would  rather  be  crucifi'd,  than  fee 
an  Ecclefiaftick  expos'd.  Pray  be  fo  kind  as  to  write  to  me 
to  Lisbon,  and  inform  [202]  me  of  what  you  hear,  in  reference 
to  my  concern.  You  have  fuch  good  Correfpondents  at 
Paris,  that  you  cannot  mifs  of  knowing  how  things  go.  I 
doubt  not  but  my  Adverfary  feeds  himfelf  with  the  hopes, 
that  his  ufual  Prefents  would  procure  the  apprehending  of  me 
in  France,  where  he  thinks  I  would  be  the  fool  to  land  :  But 
now  to  be  fure  he'll  fret  his  Heart  out,  for  that  he  cannot  gall 


298  Some  New  Voyages 

me  to  his  Wifhes.  However,  'tis  as  much  his  intereft  to  fol- 
licit  my  Death,  (purfuant  to  his  unjuft  Charge  againft  me)  as 
'tis  my  Glory  to  procure  him  a  long  Life.  Upon  this  foot, 
Sir,  the  longer  he  lives,  the  more  revenge  I  fhall  have ;  and 
confequently  I  fhall  have  an  opportunity  of  an  eafie  folace  for 
the  lofs  of  my  Places,  and  the  Difgrace  I  have  met  with  from 
the  King.     I  am, 

SIR, 

Tours,  &c. 


[.03]   MEMOIRS 

OF 

^orth' America; 

Containing  a  Geographical  Defcription  of  that  vaft  Continent ;  the 
Ciiftoms  and  Commerce^  of  the  Inhabitants^  &c. 

SIR, 

IN  my  former  Letters,  I  prefented  you  with  a  view  of  the 
EngUfh  and  French  Colonies,  the  Commerce  of  Canada, 
the  Navigation  upon  the  Rivers  and  Lakes  of  that  Country, 
the  courfe  of  faiHng  from  Europe  to  North-America,  the  feveral 
Attempts  made  by  the  EnglifJi  to  mafter  the  French  Colonies, 
the  Incurfions  of  the  French  upon  New-England,  and  upon  the 
Iroquefe  Country :  In  a  word.  Sir,  I  have  reveal'd  a  great  many 
things,  that  for  reafons  of  State  or  Politicks,  have  been 
hitherto  conceal'd ;  infomuch,  that  if  you  were  capable  of 
making  me  a  Sacrifice  to  your  Refentment,  'tis  now  in  your 
power  to  ruine  me  at  Court,  by  producing  my  Letters. 

All  that  I  writ  in  the  foregoing  Letters,  and  the  whole 
fubftance  of  the  Memoirs  I  now  fend  you,  is  truth  as  plain  as 
the  Sun-fhine.  I  flatter  no  Man,  and  I  fpare  no  body.  I  fcorn 
to  be  partial ;  I  beitow  due  praife  upon  thofe  who  are  in  no 


300  Some  New  Voyages 

capacity  to  ferve  [204]  me,  and  I  cenfure  the  Condud  of 
others,  that  are  capable  of  doing  me  an  injury  by  indired 
Methods.  I  am  not  influenc'd  by  that  principle  of  Intereft 
and  Party-making,  that  is  the  rule  of  fome  folks  words.  I 
facrifice  all  to  the  love  of  Truth,  and  write  with  no  other  view, 
than  to  give  you  a  juft  Reprefentation  of  things  as  they  are. 
'Tis  beneath  me  to  mince  or  alter  the  matter  of  fa6t,  contain'd 
either  in  the  Letters  I  fent  you  fome  ten  or  twelve  years  agoe, 
or  in  thefe  Memoirs.  In  the  courfe  of  my  Voyages  and 
Travels,  I  took  care  to  keep  particular  Journals  of  every 
thing ;  but  a  minute  relation  of  all  Particulars,  would  be  irk- 
fom  to  you,  befides,  that  the  trouble  of  taking  a  copy  of  the 
Journals,  before  I  have  an  opportunity  of  fhewing  you  the 
Original,  would  require  more  time  than  I  can  well  fpare.  In 
thefe  Memoirs  you'll  find  as  much  as  will  ferve  to  form  a 
perfect  Idea  of  the  vaft  Continent  of  North-y/wmV^.  In  the 
courfe  of  our  Correfpondence  from  the  year  1683,  to  this 
time,  I  fent  you  five  and  twenty  Letters,  of  all  which  I  have 
kept  a  double  very  carefully.  My  only  view  in  writing  of 
thefe  Letters,  was  to  inform  you  of  the  mofl  effential  things ; 
for  I  was  unwilling  to  perplex  and  confound  your  Thoughts, 
with  an  infinity  of  uncommon  things,  that  have  happen'd  in 
that  Country.  If  you'll  confult  my  Maps,  as  you  read  the 
abovemention'd  Letters,  you'll  find  a  jufl  Reprefentation  of 
all  the  places  I  have  fpoke  of.  Thefe  Maps  are  very  particu- 
lar, and  I  dare  affure  you,  they  are  the  corredefl  yet  extant. 
My  Voyage  upon  the  Long  River,  gave  me  an  opportunity  of  . 
making  that  little  Map,  which  I  fent  you  from  MiJJilimakinac  in 


to  North-\mmc2i.  301 

1699  [1689],  with  my  fixteenth  Letter.  'Tis  true,  it  gives  only 
a  bare  Defcription  of  that  River,  and  the  River  of  the  Mif- 
foiiris:  But  it  requir'd  more  time  than  I  could  fpare,  to  make 
it  more  compleat,  by  a  knowledge  of  the  adjacent  Countries, 
which  have  [205]  hitherto  been  unknown  to  all  the  World,  as 
well  as  that  great  River,  and  which  I  would  never  have  vifited, 
if  I  had  not  been  fully  inftruded  in  every  thing  that  related  to 
it,  and  convoy'd  by  a  good  Guard.  I  have  plac'd  the  Map  of 
Canada  at  the  front  of  thefe  Memoirs,  and  defire  that  favour 
of  you,  that  you  would  not  fhew  it  to  any  body  under  my 
Name.  To  the  latter  part  I  have  fubjoyn'd  an  Explication 
of  the  Marine^  and  other  difficult  Terms,  made  ufe  of  in  my 
Letters,  as  well  as  in  thefe  Memoirs  ;  which  you'll  pleafe  to 
confult,  when  you  meet  with  a  word  that  you  do  not  under- 
ftand. 

A  jhort  Dejcription  of  Canada. 

You'll  think,  Sir,  that  I  advance  a  Paradox,  when  I  acquaint 
you  that  Ntw-France,  commonly  call'd  Canada^  comprehends  a 
greater  extent  of  Ground,  than  the  half  of  Europe :  But  pray 
mind  what  proof  I  have  for  that  Affertion.  You  know  that 
Europe  extends  South  and  North,  from  the  35  to  the  72  degree 
of  Latitude,  or  if  you  will,  from  Cadiz  to  the  North  Cape  on 
the  confines  oi  Lapland ;  and  that  it's  Longitude  reaches  from 
the  ()th  to  the  <)^th  Degree,  that  is,  from  the  River  Oby^  to  the 
Weft  Cape  in  TJlandia.  But  at  the  fame  time,  if  we  take  the 
greateft  breadth  of  Europe^  from  Eaft  to  Weft,  from  the  imag- 
inary Canal,  (for  Inftance)  between  the  Tanais  and  the  VoJga^ 


302  Some  New  Voyages 

to  Dinglebay  in  Ireland^  it  makes  but  66  Degrees  of  Longitude, 
which  contain  more  Leagues  than  the  Degrees  allotted  to  it 
towards  the  Polar  Circle,  though  thefe  are  more  numerous,  by 
reafon  that  the  degrees  of  Longitude  are  unequal :  And  fince 
we  are  wont  to  meafure  Provinces,  lilands,  and  Kingdoms  by 
the  fpace  of  Ground,  I  am  of  the  Opinion,  that  we  ought  to 
make  ufe  of  the  fame  Standard,  with  refpedl  to  the  four  parts 
of  the  World.  The  Geographers  who  parcel  [206]  out  the 
Earth  in  their  Clofets,  according  to  their  fancy ;  thefe  Gentle- 
men, I  fay,  might  have  been  aware  of  this  advance,  if  they  had 
been  more  careful.     But,  to  come  to  Canada; 

All  the  World  knows,  that  Canada  reaches  from  the  39/^ 
to  the  6^th  Deg.  of  Latitude,  that  is,  from  the  South  fide  of 
the  Lake  Erri^^  to  the  North  fide  of  Hudfon's  Bay ;  and  from 
the  284^^,  to  the  336//?  Degree  of  Longitude,  viz.  from  the 
River  Miffifipi^  to  Cape  Rafe  in  the  Ifland  of  Newfoundland.^ 
I  affirm  therefore,  that  Europe  has  but  1 1  Degrees  of  Latitude, 
and  33  of  Longitude,  more  than  Canada,  in  which  I  compre- 
hend the  Ifland  of  New-Foundland,  Acadia,  and  all  the  other 
Countries  that  lye  to  the  Northward  of  the  River  of  St. 
Laurence,  which  is  the  pretended  great  boundary  that  fevers 
the  French  Colonies  from  the  EngUfli.  Were  I  to  reckon  in  all 
the  Countries  that  lye  to  the  North- Weft  of  Canada,  I  fliould 


^  The  claim  for  Canadian  limits  as  far  south  as  39°  of  latitude  would  extend  them 
nearly  to  the  Ohio  River.  Longitude  was  reckoned  at  this  time  from  west  to  east 
entirely  around  the  globe,  the  prime  meridian  in  most  common  use  being  that  of  the 
Canary  Islands,  supposed  to  be  the  "  Fortunate  Isles"  of  Ptolemy.  The  longitude 
of  the  Mississippi,  therefore,  at  its  eastern  projection  would  be  about  284° ;  that  of  Cape 
Race  was  usually  estimated  at  about  330°.  —  Ed. 


to  N orth' Amtxicdi,  303 

find  it  larger  than  Europe:  But  I  confine  my  felf  to  what  is 
difcover'd,  known  and  own'd ;  I  mean,  to  the  Countries  in 
which  the  French  trade  with  the  Natives  for  Beavers,  and  in 
which  they  have  Forts,  Magazines,  Miflionaries,  and  fmall 
Settlements. 

'Tis  above  a  Century  and  a  half  fince  Canada  was  dif- 
cover'd. John  Verafan  was  the  firft  Difcoverer,  though  he 
got  nothing  by  it,  for  the  Savages  eat  him  up.^  James  Cartier 
was  the  next  that  went  thither,  but  after  failing  with  his  Ship 
above  Quebec^  he  return'd  to  France  with  a  forry  opinion  of 
the  Country.2  At  laft  better  Sailors  were  imploy'd  in  the  Dif- 
covery,  and  trac'd  the  River  of  St.  Laurence  more  narrowly  : 
And  about  the  beginning  of  the  laft  Century,  a  Colony  was 
fent  thither  from  Rouan,  which  fetled  there  after  a  great  deal 
of  oppofition  from  the  Natives.^    At  this  day  the  Colony  is  fo 


^  Giovanni  da  Verrazzano  was  a  Florentine  navigator,  who,  sailing  under  the 
French  flag,  explored  the  coast  of  North  America  (1524)  from  Carolina  to  Newfound- 
land. The  authenticity  of  his  narrative  has  been  doubted,  and  for  a  long  time  there 
was  a  critical  controversy  concerning  his  Relation  ;  but  its  genuineness  is  now  generally 
accepted  by  historians.  See  Old  South  Leaflets,  No.  17,  and  authorities  therein  cited  ; 
also  Harrisse,  Discovery  of  North  America  (London  and  Paris,  1892),  pp.  218-228. 
One  of  his  earliest  biographers  relates  his  death  upon  a  later  voyage  at  the  hands  of  the 
Indians.  —  Ed. 

2  For  an  account  of  Cartier's  explorations,  and  the  recent  investigations  concerning 
them,  see  Pope,  Jacques  Cartier  (Ottawa,  1889)  ;  Dionne,  Jacques  Cartier  (Quebec, 
1889).  A  version  of  his /^o^'fl^^j  was  published  by  Stevens  (Montreal,  1890).  Cartier 
made  three  (possibly  four)  voyages  to  North  America  (1534-42),  discovered  and 
explored  the  St.  Lawrence  as  far  as  Lachine  rapids,  and  made  full  reports  of  his  adven- 
tures.    His  accounts  are  far  from  being  as  discouraging  as  Lahontan  represents.  —  Ed. 

^  Lahontan  here  refers  to  the  first  permanent  settlement  of  New  France,  made  by 
Champlain  upon  the  site  of  Quebec  (1608).  The  colony  was  fostered  by  a  company 
of  Rouen  merchants  —  see  Biggar,  Early  Trading  Companies  of  Ne^w  France  (To- 
ronto, 1901).     The  opposition  of  the  aborigines  is  exaggerated  by  our  author.  —  Ed. 


304  Some  New  Voyages 

populous,  that  'tis  computed  to  contain  180000  Souls.^  I  have 
already  given  you  fome  account  of  that  Country  in  [207]  my 
Letters,  and  therefore  fhall  now  only  point  to  the  moft  noted 
places,  and  take  notice  of  vi'hat  may  gratifie  your  curiofity 
beyond  what  you  have  yet  heard. 

We  are  at  a  lofs  to  find  the  Head  of  the  River  of  St. 
Laurence^  for  tho'  we  have  traced  it  feven  or  eight  hundred 
Leagues  up,  yet  we  could  never  reach  its  fource  ;  the  remoteft 
place  that  the  Coiireitrs  de  Bois  go  to,  being  the  Lake  Lenemi- 
pigon^  which  difimbogues  into  the  Upper  Lake,  as  the  Upper 
Lake  do's  into  the  Lake  of  Hurons,  the  Lake  of  Hiirons  into 
that  of  ErrU  alias  Conti,  and  that  of  Errie,  into  the  Lake  of 
Frontenac,^  which  forms  this  laft  great  River,  that  runs  for 
twenty  Leagues  with  a  pretty  gentle  Stream,  and  fweeps  thro' 
thirty  more  with  a  very  rapid  Current,  till  it  reaches  the  City 
of  Monreal;  from  whence  it  continues  its  courfe  with  fome 
moderation  to  the  City  of  Quebec;  and  after  that  fpreads  out, 
and  inlarges  it  felf  by  degrees  to  its  Mouth,  v/hich  lies  a 
hundred  Leagues  further.  If  we  may  credit  the  North- 
Country  Savages,  this  River  takes  its  rife  from  the  great 
Lake  of  the  JJfmipouals,  which  they  give  out  to  be  larger  than 
any  of  the  Lakes  I  mention'd  but  now,  being  fituated  at  the 


^  This  should  be  18,000.  Ferland,  Cours  d'Histoire  du  Canada  (Quebec,  1865), 
ii,  p.  390,  gives  the  exact  population  in  1713  as  18,440,  taken  from  the  archives  of  the 
diocese  of  Quebec.  —  Ed. 

2 Lake  Lenemipigon  was  the  present  Nipigon,  north  of  Lake  Superior  (Upper 
Lake).  For  the  first  exploration  of  this  region  see  p.  136,  note  i,  ante;  also 
Thwaites,  Early  IFestern  Travels  (Cleveland,  1904),  ii,  p.  87,  note  45.  Lake 
Ontario  was  frequently  called  "  Frontenac  "  by  the  French.  —  Ed. 


to  North-A.VLimc2i.  305 

diftance  of  fifty  or  fixty  Leagues  from  the  Lake  of  Lenemipigon} 
The  River  of  St.  Laurence  is  20  or  22  Leagues  broad  at  its 
Mouth,  in  the  middle  of  which  there's  anifland  CdlVdyinticoJii^ 
which  is  twenty  Leagues  long.  This  Ifland  belongs  to  the 
Sieur  Joliet  a  Canadan,  who  has  built  a  little  fortify'd  Maga- 
zine upon  it,  to  guard  his  Goods  and  his  Family  from  the 
Incurfions  of  the  Eskimaux,  of  whom  more  anon.  He  deals 
with  the  other  Savage  Nations,  namely,  the  Montagnois^  and 
the  Papipanachois  in  Arms  and  Ammunition,  by  way  of 
exchange  for  the  Skins  of  Sea-Wolves  or  Sea-Calves,  and 
fome  other  Furs.^ 

Over  againft  this  Ifland,  to  the  Southward  of  it,  we  find 
the  Ifle  call'd  L'ljle  Percee,  which  is  a  great  Rock  with  a 
pafl"age  bor'd  through  it,  in  which  [208]  the  Sloops  can 
only  pafs.^  In  time  of  Peace  the  Bifcayans  of  France^  and 
the  Normans^  us'd  to  fifh  for  Cod  at  this  place  :  For  here 
that  Fifh  are  very  plentiful,  and  at  the  fame  time  larger,  and 
more  proper  for  drying  than  thofe  of  New-Foundland.  But 
there  are  two  great  Inconveniencies   that  attend  the  fifhing 


^  The  Assinipouals  were  the  present  Assiniboin  Indians,  a  large  Siouan  tribe  of 
the  Northwest  region.     The  lake  here  referred  to  was  Winnipeg.  ^ — Ed. 

^For  Jolliet  and  the  seignoiry  of  Anticosti,  see  pp.  243,  244,  note  2,  ante.  The 
Indians  mentioned  are  noticed  on  p.  261,  note  2.  —  Ed. 

'Isle  Perce  (now  called  Perce  Rock)   is  a  remarkable  cliflF  of  primitive  rock 

separated  from  the  mainland  of  Gaspe  by  the  action  of  the  waves  and  ice,  which 

have  also  worn  through  it  a  great  arch  from  which  the  islet  takes  its  name.     The 

village  of  Perce,  near  by,  is  one  of  the  oldest  and  most  interesting  fishing  stations 

on  the  continent.     For  an   excellent   and  well-illustrated  description,   see  Clarke, 

"  Perce  :  a  brief  sketch  of  its  geology,"  in  Report  of  New  York  State  Paleontologist, 

1903.  —  Ed. 

ao 


3o6  Some  New  Voyages 

upon  this  Ifland  ;  one  Is,  that  the  Ships  ride  in  great  danger, 
unlefs  they  have  good  Anchors  and  ftrong  Cables ;  another 
Inconvenience  is,  that  this  place  affords  neither  Gravel  nor 
Flint-ftones  to  ftretch  out  the  Fifh  upon  before  the  Sun, 
and  that  the  Fifhermen  are  forc'd  to  make  ufe  of  a  fort  of 
Hurdles. 

There  are  other  Fifhing-places  befides  this,  which  lie  fome 
Leagues  higher  up  upon  the  fame  fide  of  the  River.  Such  is 
that  call'd  Gafpe,  where  the  Ships  Crew  fometimes  trade  in 
Skins  with  the  Gafpefians,  to  the  prejudice  of  the  Proprietors 
of  this  River.  The  other  places  for  Cod-fifh  lie  toward  Monts 
notre  dame,  in  the  little  Bays  or  Rivers  that  empty  themfelves 
into  the  River  of  St.  Laiirejtce} 

On  the  other  fide  of  the  River,  there  lies  the  wide  extended 
Country  of  Labrador,  or  of  the  Eskimaux,  who  are  fuch  a  wild 
barbarous  People,  that  no  means  whatfoever,  have  hitherto 
been  able  to  civihfe  'em.  One  would  think  that  good  old 
Homer  had  this  People  in  his  view,  when  he  fpeaks  of  the 
Cyclopes ;  for  the  Charader  of  the  one,  fuits  the  other  admir- 
ably well,  as  it  appears  from  thefe  four  Verfes,  in  the  ninth 

iGaspe  is  an  Indian  term  signifying  "that  which  is  separated,"  and  originally 
applied  only  to  Cape  Forillon,  a  lonely  detached  rock  at  the  extremity  of  the  penin- 
sula. It  is  now  extended  to  the  entire  broad  peninsula  between  the  St.  Lawrence 
and  the  Bay  of  Chaleurs,  the  coast  of  which  is  dotted  with  French-Canadian  fishing 
villages.  Monts  Notre  Dame  was  the  early  name  for  the  Chicchack  (Shickshock) 
range,  which  traverses  the  peninsula  and  forms  the  watershed.  The  interior  of  Gaspe 
is  still  a  forested  wilderness,  and  the  home  of  big  game.  At  several  points  wealthy 
Americans  have  of  recent  years  bought  large  tracts  for  game  preserves  ;  on  the  other 
hand,  the  lumber  industry,  also  largely  capitalized  by  Americans,  is  rapidly  making 
inroads  into  the  forest.  —  Ed. 


to  iVor^/6-America.  307 

Book  of  his  Od[>/t'^,  which  are  fo  pretty,  that  I  cannot  forbear 
inferting  them  in  this  place. 

Am,  o»)r  u^|'«A(Mv  opewj'  vtzom  y.(tnvcc 

[209]  That  is;  this  People  do  not  perplex  themfelves 
with  voluminous  Laws,  and  vexatious  Suits;  they  delight  only 
in  the  tops  of  Mountains,  and  deep  Caves,  and  every  one 
confines  his  care  to  the  management  of  his  own  Family,  with- 
out troubling  his  Head  about  his  Neighbour.  The  Danes 
were  the  firft  difcoverers  of  this  Country,  which  is  full  of 
Ports,  Havens,  and  Bays,  that  the  Quebec  Barques  refort  to  in 
the  Summer,  in  order  to  truck  with  the  Savages  for  the  Skins 
of  Sea-Calves.i  Yhe  Commerce  I  fpeak  of,  is  carried  on  after 
this  manner.  As  foon  as  the  Quebec  Barques  come  to  an 
Anchor,  thefe  Devils  come  on  board  of  them  in  their  little 
Canows  made  of  the  Skins  of  Sea-Calves,  in  the  form  of  a 
Weavers  Shuttle,  with  a  hole  in  the  middle  of  it,  refembling 
that  of  a  Purfe,  in  which  they  flow  themfelves  with  Ropes, 
fitting  fquat  upon  their  Brech.  Being  fet  in  this  fafhion  they 
row  with  little  Slices,  fometimes  to  the  Right,  and  fometimes 
to  the  Left,  without  bending  their  Body  for  fear   of  Over- 


1  It  is  not  probable  that  Lahontan  here  refers  to  the  early  discovery  of  this  country 
by  the  Norsemen.  Gomara,  in  Histoire  Generalle  des  hides  Occidentalis  et  Terres 
neuves,  translated  into  French  and  published  in  1569,  declares  that  the  Bretons  and 
Danes  made  the  first  voyages  to  Baccaleos — a  term  used  for  both  the  Newfoundland 
and  Labrador  coasts.  Lahontan  is  probably  following  this  authority,  or  a  similar  one, 
for  his  historical  remarks ;  the  description  of  the  trading  is  evidently  the  report  of  an 
eye  witness.  —  Ed. 


3o8  Some  New  Voyages 

fetting.  As  foon  as  they  are  near  the  Barque,  they  hold  up 
their  Skins  upon  the  end  of  the  Oar,  and  at  the  fame  time 
make  a  demand  of  fo  many  Knives,  Powder,  Ball,  Fufees,  Axes, 
Kettles,  (s'c.  In  fine,  every  one  fhews  what  he  has,  and  mentions 
what  he  expe6ls  in  exchange :  And  fo  when  the  Bargain  is 
concluded,  they  deliver  and  receive  their  Goods  upon  the  end 
of  a  Stick.  As  thefe  pitiful  Fellows  ufe  the  precaution  of  not 
going  on  board  of  our  Boats,  fo  we  take  care  not  to  fuflfer 
too  great  a  number  of  Canows  to  furround  us ;  for  they  have 
carry'd  off  oftner  than  once,  fome  of  our  fmall  Veffels,  at  a 
time  when  the  Seamen  were  bufied  in  hauling  in  the  Skins, 
and  delivering  out  the  other  Goods.  Here,  we  are  oblig'd  to 
be  very  vigilant  in  the  Night-time,  for  they  know  how  to 
make  great  Sloops,  that  will  hold  thirty  or  forty  Men,  and 
run  as  faft  as  the  Wind:  And  'tis  for  this  [210]  reafon  that 
the  Malouins,  who  fifh  for  Cod  at  Petit  Nord,  and  the  Spatt- 
iards  who  follow  the  fame  Fifhery  TitPortochoua}  are  oblig'd  to 
fit  out  long  Barques  to  fcour  the  Coaft  and  purfue  'em ;  for 
almoft  every  year  they  furprife  fome  of  the  Crew  on  fhoar, 
and  cut  their  Throats,  and  fometimes  they  carry  off  the  Veffel. 
We  are  affur'd,  that  their  number  of  Warriours,  or  Men  that 
bear  Arms,  amounts  to  thirty  thoufand  ;  but  they  are  fuch 
cowardly  fellows,   that  five   hundred   Clijiino's  from  Hudfons 


^  French  fishers  from  St.  Malo  and  other  Breton  towns  were  among  the  earliest 
explorers  of  the  Newfoundland  coast.  They  termed  all  of  the  great  upper  peninsula 
of  the  island,  from  W^hite  Bay  northward,  Petit  Nord,  and  it  was  theirfavorite  fishing 
ground.  The  Spanish  Basque  fishermen  frequented  the  northwest  coast,  and  their 
port  was  Portachua,  now  called  Old  Port  au  Choix.  —  Ed. 


to  North'hxnQnc2i,  309 

Bayy  ufed  to  defeat  five  or  fix  thoufand  of  them.^  They  are 
poffefs'd  of  a  very  large  Country,  extending  from  over  againft 
the  Ifles  of  Mingan  to  Hudfons  Streight.  They  crofs  over  to 
the  liland  of  Newfound-Land  every  day,  at  the  Streight  of 
Belle  Ifle,  which  is  not  above  feven  Leagues  over;  but  they 
never  came  fo  far  as  Placentia^  for  fear  of  meeting  with  other 
Savages  there. 

Hudfon's  Bay  adjoyns  to  this  Terra  of  Labrador,  and 
extends  from  the  52^  Degree  and  thirty  Minutes  to  the  6^ 
of  Latitude.  The  Original  of  its  name  was  this.  Captain 
Henry  Hud/on,  an  Engli/h  Man  by  Birth,  obtain'd  a  Ship  from 
the  Dutch,  in  order  to  trace  a  paffage  to  China  through  an 
imaginary  Streight  to  the  Northward  of  North- J merica.  He 
had  firft  form'd  a  defign  of  going  by  the  way  oi  Nova  Zembla; 
but  upon  feeing  the  Memoirs  of  a  Danijh  Pilot,  who  was  a 
friend  of  his,  he  drop'd  that  thought.  This  Pilot,  namely, 
Frederick  Anfchild,  had  fet  out  from  Norway  or  TJlandia,  fome 
years  before,  with  a  defign  to  find  out  a  Paffage  to  Japan  by 
Davis's  Streight,  which  is  the  Chimerical  Streight  I  fpoke  of.^ 


1  The  Cristinaux  (Killlstinoe,  Clistino)  Indians  are  a  large  branch  of  the  Algon- 
quian  family,  that  roam  the  Hudson  Bay  country  and  far  to  the  west.  They  are  now 
known  as  the  Cree,  their  present  number  being  reckoned  at  twelve  thousand.  For 
further  details  of  this  tribe  see  Henry,  Travels  and  Adventures  (Bain,  ed.,  Boston, 
1901),  p.  246.  —  Ed. 

2  The  standard  authority  for  the  voyages  of  Hudson  is  Asher,  Henry  Hudson 
the  Navigator  (London,  i860),  printed  for  the  Hakluyt  Society,  vol.  xxvii.  The 
editor  in  his  introduction  says  that  the  story  of  the  Danish  pilot  Anschild  (Anskoeld) 
is  a  myth,  growing  out  of  the  expedition  of  a  Pole,  Johannes  Kolnus,  whose  voyage 
(1476)  was  cited  by  the  geographers  of  the  sixteenth  century  in  distorted  terms.  See 
also  Read,  Historical  Inquiry  concerning  Henry  Hudson  (Albany,  1866)  ;  De  Costa, 
Sailing  Directions  of  Henry  Hudson  (Albany,  1869).  —  Ed. 


3IO  Some  New  Voyages 

The  firft  Land  he  defcry'd  was  Savage  Bay,  feated  on  the 
North  fide  of  the  Terra  of  Labrador ;  then  fweeping  along 
the  Coaft,  he  enter'd  a  Streight,  which  about  twenty  or  thirty 
years  afterwards,  was  chriften'd  Hudfon's  Streight.  After  that, 
fteering  to  the  Weftward,  he  came  upon  fome  [211]  Coaft  that 
run  North  and  South ;  upon  which  he  fhood  to  the  North, 
flattering  himfelf  with  the  hopes  of  finding  an  open  paffage 
to  crofs  the  Sea  of  Jejfo;  but  after  failing  to  the  Latitude 
of  the  Polar  Circle,  and  running  the  rifque  of  perifhing  in 
the  Ice,  I  do  not  know  how  often,  without  meeting  with  any 
paffage  or  open  Sea,  he  took  up  a  refolution  of  turning  back; 
but  the  Seafon  was  then  fo  far  advanc'd,  and  the  Ice  fo  cover'd 
up  the  furface  of  the  Water,  that  he  was  forc'd  to  put  in  to 
Hudfon's  Bay,  and  winter  there  in  a  Harbour,  where  feveral 
Savages  furnifh'd  his  Crew  with  Provifions  and  excellent 
Skins.  As  foon  as  the  Sea  was  open,  he  return'd  to  Den- 
mark. Now,  Captain  Hiidfon  being  afterwards  acquainted 
with  this  Dane,  undertook  upon  his  Journals  to  attempt  a 
paffage  to  Japan  through  the  Streight  of  Davis;  but  the 
Enterprife  fail'd,  as  well  as  that  of  one  Button,  and  fome 
others.^     However,  Hudfon  put  in  to  the  Bay  that  now  goes 


^  From  1576  to  1632  there  were  sixteen  English  voyages  of  exploration  for  a 
Northwest  Passage.  That  of  John  Davis,  whose  name  is  commemorated  in  Davis 
Strait,  occurred  in  1585.  The  same  navigator  made  two  later  voyages  to  Arctic 
regions,  and  was  finally  murdered  by  Japanese  pirates  in  the  East  Indies  (1606).  See 
Markham,  "Voyages  and  Works  of  John  Davis,  Navigator"  (London,  1880), 
Publications  of  Hakluyt  Society,  No.  59.  Sir  Thomas  Button  followed  on  the  track 
of  Henry  Hudson,  and  explored  the  great  bay  bearing  the  latter's  name  (1612-13); 
he  was  knighted  for  his  services.  See  Christy,  Voyages  of  Captain  Luke  Foxe  and 
Captain  Thomas  James  (London,  1894),  Hakluyt  Society,  No.  88.  —  Ed. 


to  No7'th' A\r\^nc2i.  311 

by  his  name,  where  he  receiv'd  a  great  quantity  of  Skins  from 
the  Savages ;  after  that,  he  difcover'd  New  Holland,  which  is 
now  call'd  New-Tork}  and  fome  other  Countries  retaining  to 
New-England:  upon  the  whole,  'tis  not  fair  to  call  this 
Streight  and  this  Bay,  by  the  name  of  Hudfon  ;  in  regard  that 
the  abovemention'd  Dane,  Frederick  Anjchild,  was  the  firft 
difcoverer  of  them ;  he  being  the  firft  European  that  defcry'd 
the  Countries  of  North-^mmc^,  and  chalk'd  out  the  way  to 
the  others.  Upon  this  Hudfon'^  Journals,  the  Englijh  made 
feveral  attempts  to  fettle  a  Commerce  with  the  Americans. 
The  great  quantity  of  Beaver-Skins  and  other  Furs  that  he 
purchas'd  of  the  Savages  while  he  Winter'd  in  the  Bay,  put 
the  notion  into  the  heads  of  fome  Englifli  Merchants,  who 
thereupon  form'd  a  Company  for  the  carrying  on  of  this  New 
Commerce.  With  this  view,  they  fitted  out  fome  Ships  under 
the  command  of  Captain  Nelfon,  who  loft  fome  of  'em  in  the 
Ice  not  far  from  the  [212]  Streight,  having  efcap'd  narrowly 
himfelf.  However,  he  enter'd  the  Bay,  and  plac'd  himfelf  at 
the  Mouth  of  a  great  River,  which  rifes  towards  the  Lake  of 
the  Afimpoiiah,  and  falls  into  the  Bay  at  a  place  where  he  built 
a  Redoubt,  and  mounted  fome  Cannon  upon  it.^    In  the  fpace 

1  Hudson  did  not  discover  the  great  bay  of  that  name  until  his  fourth  voyage 
(1610-11),  whence  he  never  returned.  His  exploration  of  New  Holland  (preferably 
New  Netherlands)  occurred  upon  his  third  voyage  (1609).  —  Ed. 

2  This  voyage  of  Nelson  is  hypothetical,  apparently  invented  to  account  for  the 
name  Nelson  River.  The  wintering  place  at  its  mouth  was  named  Port  Nelson  by 
Button,  in  honor  of  his  sailing  master,  who  died  and  was  buried  there;  thence  the 
name  extended  to  the  river.  In  the  confusion  of  Lahontan's  account,  it  is  uncertain 
whether  he  refers  to  the  organization  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company  (1670) ,  or  to  the 


312  Some  New  Voyages 

of  three  or  four  years  after,  the  Englifli  made  fome  other  little 
Forts  near  that  River,  which  prov'd  a  confiderable  baulk  to 
the  Commerce  of  the  French^  who  found  that  the  Savages  who 
us'd  to  deal  with  'em  in  Furs  on  the  North  fide  of  the  upper 
Lake,  were  not  then  to  be  feen. 

It  came  to  pafs  in  procefs  of  time,  but  how  I  cannot  tell, 
that  one  Ratijfon,  and  one  Grozelier,  met  in  that  great  Lake 
fome  Clipno^s,  who  promis'd  to  condud  'em  to  the  bottom  of 
the  Bay,  where  the  Engli/Ji  had  not  yet  penetrated.  In  effed, 
the  CUflino^s  were  as  good  as  their  word ;  for  they  (hew'd  'em 
the  place  they  fpoke  of,  befides  feveral  other  Rivers  upon 
which  there  was  a  fair  profpedl  of  making  fuch  Settlements, 
as  would  carry  on  a  great  trade  in  Skins  with  feveral  Savage 
Nations.^  Thefe  two  Frenchmen  return'd  to  the  Upper  Lake, 
the  fame  way  that  they  went,  and  from  thence  made  the  beft 
of  their  way  to  Quebec,  where  they  offer'd  to  the  chief  Mer- 
chants of  the  place,  to  carry  Ships  to  Hudfon^s  Bay ;  but  their 


incorporation  of  "The  Company  of  the  Merchants  of  London,  Discoverers  of  the 
North-West  Passage,"  which  latter  received  its  charter  in  1612  (Hakluyt  Society, 
No.  89,  pp.  642-664). — Ed. 

1  Pierre  Esprit  Radisson  and  Medard  Chouart  des  Groseilliers  were  among  the 
most  interesting  and  daring  adventurers  of  the  early  years  of  New  France.  It  is  not 
beyond  probability  that  Lahontan  had  known  them  either  in  Canada  or  at  the  English 
court.  Their  alleged  overland  visit  to  Hudson  Bay,  on  what  is  known  as  their 
"fourth  voyage,"  is  open  to  doubt.  For  the  evidence  see  Campbell,  "  Radisson  and 
Groseillers,"  in  Parkman  Club  Papers  (Milwaukee,  1896);  Wis.  Hist.  Soc.  Pro- 
ceedings, 1895,  pp.  88-116;  Bryce,  The  Remarkable  History  of  Hudson's  Bay 
Company  (Toronto,  1900),  pp.  4-7.  The  latter  author  (pp.  39-46)  has  unearthed 
some  new  evidence  concerning  Radisson's  later  life  and  death  in  England  (1710). 
Radisson' s  Voyages  (Boston,  1885)  are  published  by  the  Prince  Society,  No.  16  ;  see 
also  JVis.  Hist.  Colls.,  xi,  pp.  64-96;  Dionne,  "Chouart  et  Radisson,"  in  Can, 
Roy.  Soc.  Proceedings,  1893,  1894.  —  Ed. 


to  7Vor^/6- America.  313 

Projedl  was  rejedled.  In  fine,  having  met  with  this  repulfe, 
they  went  to  France^  in  hopes  of  a  more  favourable  hearing  at 
Court :  But  after  the  prefenting  of  Memorial  upon  Memorial, 
and  fpending  a  great  deal  of  Money,  they  were  treated  as 
whimfical  Fellows.  Upon  that  occafion  the  King  oi  England^ 
Ambaffadour  did  not  lofe  the  opportunity  of  perfwading  them 
to  go  to  London^  where  they  met  with  fuch  a  favourable  Re- 
ception, that  they  got  feveral  Ships,  which  they  carry'd  to  the 
Bay,  not  without  difficulty,  and  built  feveral  Forts  in  different 
places,  [213]  that  did  great  fervice  in  promoting  the  Com- 
merce.^ Then  the  Court  of  France  repented,  though  too  late, 
that  they  did  not  give  ear  to  their  Memorials:  and  finding  no 
other  remedy,  refolv'd  to  diflodge  the  Englijh  at  any  rate.  In 
effed,  they  attack'd  'em  vigoroufly  by  Sea  and  Land,  and  dif- 
poffefs'd  'em  of  all  their  Forts,  excepting  Fort  Nelfon^  where 
they  could  not  expedl  fuch  an  eafie  Conqueft.^  Some  years 
after,  the  E?igli/h  refolv'd  to  ufe  their  utmoft  efforts  to  retake 
thefe  Pofts ;  and  their  refolution  was  crown'd  with  Succefs, 
for  they  diflodg'd  the  French  in  their  turn,  and  at  this  day  the 


^The  first  permanent  trading  fort  (or  factory)  in  Hudson  Bay  was  that  erected 
by  Groseilliers  upon  Rupert  River  in  the  autumn  of  1668,  and  christened  Fort  Charles 
in  honor  of  the  king.  The  success  of  this  trading  venture  led  to  the  chartering  (1670) 
of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company.  —  Ed. 

^Radisson  organized  an  expedition  in  the  French  interest  in  1682,  set  out  for  the 
bay,  captured  a  ship  and  the  English  governor,  and  built  Fort  Bourbon  not  far  from 
Fort  Nelson.  Upon  his  return  (1684),  when  France  was  on  the  point  of  dispatching 
another  squadron  under  his  guidance,  he  deserted  to  the  English,  returned  to  Fort 
Bourbon,  and  retook  it  and  its  furs  in  the  interest  of  the  Company.  The  authorities 
of  New  France  resolved  on  retribution,  and  an  overland  expedition  (1685-87),  headed 
by  De  Troyes  and  d'Iberville  captured  all  the  forts  except  that  upon  Nelson  River. 
See  p.  217,  note  3,  ante.  —  Ed. 


314  Some  New  Voyages 

French  are  making  preparations  to  repay  'em  in  their  own 
Coin.^ 

That  Country  is  fo  cold  for  feven  or  eight  Months  of  the 
year,  that  the  Sea  freezes  ten  Foot  deep,  the  Trees  and  the 
very  Stones  fpht,  the  Snow  is  ten  or  twelve  Foot  deep  upon 
the  Ground,  for  above  fix  Months  of  the  year,  and  during 
that  feafon,  no  body  can  ftir  out  of  Doors,  without  running 
the  rifque  of  having  their  Nofe,  Ears  and  Feet  mortified  by 
the  Cold.  The  pafl"age  from  Europe  to  that  Country  is  fo 
difficult  and  dangerous,  by  reafon  of  the  Ice  and  the  Cur- 
rents, that  one  mufl;  be  reduc'd  to  the  lafl:  degree  of  mifery, 
or  be  blind  to  a  foolifli  heighth,  that  undertakes  fuch  a 
wretched  Voyage. 

'Tis  now  time  to  pafs  from  Hiidfon's  Bay,  to  the  Superior 
or  Upper  Lake.  'Tis  eafier  to  make  this  Voyage  upon  Paper, 
than  to  go  adlually  through  it ;  for  you  muft  fail  almoft  a  hun- 
dred Leagues  up  the  River  of  Machakandibi^  which  is  fo  rapid 
and  full  of  Cataradls,  that  a  light  Canow  work'd  by  fix  Water- 
men, fhall  not  fail  'em  under  thirty  or  thirty  five  days.  At  the 
head  of  this  River  we  meet  with  a  little  Lake  of  the  fame 
name,  from  whence  we  are  oblig'd  to  a  Land-carriage  of  feven 
Leagues,  to  get  at  the  River  of  Michipikoton^  which  we  run 
down  in  ten  or  twelve  days,  though  at  the  fame  [214]  time  we 


^  After  the  first  Canadian  punitive  expedition  (see  preceding  note),  each  nation 
made  frequent  armed  attempts  to  dislodge  the  other  from  the  lucrative  trading  posts  of 
Hudson  Bay.  See  the  brief  summary  in  Bryce,  Hudson' s  Bay  Company,  pp.  47-55. 
Lahontan  probably  refers  to  the  preparations  being  made  for  d'Iberville's  brilliant 
expedition  of  1697.  The  French  were  not  finally  expelled  from  the  forts  on  the  lower, 
or  James,  Bay  until  after  the  treaty  of  Utrecht  (1713). — Ed. 


to  iVo/Y/6- America.  315 

have  feveral  Land-carriages  upon  it :  For  going  down  this 
River  we  pafs  feveral  Cataradls,  where  we  are  oblig'd  either 
to  carry  our  Canows  by  Land,  or  to  drag  'em  back  again.^ 
Thus  we  arrive  at  the  Upper  Lake,  which  is  reckon'd  to  be 
five  hundred  Leagues  in  Circumference,  including  the  wind- 
ings of  the  Creeks,  and  little  Gulfs.  This  little  frefh-water 
Sea  is  calm  enough  from  the  beginning  of  May,  to  the  end  of 
September.  The  South  fide  is  the  fafeft  for  the  Canows,  by 
reafon  of  the  many  Bays,  and  little  Rivers,  where  one  may  put 
in  in  cafe  of  a  Storm.  There  is  no  fetled  Savage  Nation  upon 
the  brinks  of  the  Lake,  that  I  know  of.  'Tis  true  indeed, 
that  in  Summer  feveral  Northern  Nations  come  to  Hunt  and 
Fifh  in  thefe  parts,  and  bring  with  'em  the  Beaver-Skins  they 
have  got  in  the  Winter,  in  order  to  truck  with  the  Coureurs 
de  Boh,  who  do  not  fail  to  meet  'em  there  every  year.  The 
places  where  the  Interview  happens,  are  Bagouafch,  Lemipifaki, 
and  Chagouamigon?     'Tis  fome  years  fince  Mr.  Diilhut  built 


^  Probably  Lahontan  had  conversed  at  Mackinac  with  natives  or  coureurs  des  bois 
who  described  the  journey  from  Hudson  Bay  to  Lake  Superior.  The  ' '  River  of  Mac- 
hakandibi  "  is  likely  the  present  Moose  River,  whence  the  portage  to  the  Michipiciton 
is  not  long.  —  Ed. 

2  It  is  probable  that  Lahontan  had  his  information  concerning  Lake  Superior  from 
Duluth  (see  p.  73,  note  1,  ante),  who  roamed  this  region  for  a  dozen  years.  Bagou- 
asch  is  a  river  on  the  north  side  of  the  lake,  east  of  Nipigon,  where,  according  to  an 
inscription  upon  a  map  of  1756,  Duluth  had  had  a  fort.  Neill,  Minn.  Hist.  Colls., 
V,  p.  417,  identifies  (but  without  giving  reasons)  Lemipisaki  with  Nipigon  ;  but  there 
is  a  greater  probability  that  it  was  Nemitsakouat,  at  Bois  Brule  River,  which  empties 
into  Lake  Superior  to  the  west  of  Chequamegon  Bay  ;  Duluth  had  a  rendezvous  witli 
the  Indians,  on  the  Bois  Brule.  See  Wis.  Hist.  Colls.,  xvi,  p.  108.  Chequamegon 
was  a  well-known  post  on  the  present  bay  of  that  name,  where  a  fort  was  first  built  by 
Radisson  and  Groseilliers.  SeeThwaites,  "  Story  of  Chequamegon,"  in  floiu  George 
Rogers  Clark  fFon  the  Northwest,  etc.  (Chicago,  1903).  —  Ed. 


3i6  Some  New  Voyages 

a  Fort  of  Pales  or  Stakes  upon  this  Lake,  where  he  had 
large  Magazines  of  all  forts  of  Goods.  That  Fort  was  call'd 
Camanijiigoyan,  and  did  confiderable  Differvice  to  the  Engli/h 
Settlements  in  Hudfoit's  Bay ;  by  reafon  that  it  fav'd  feveral 
Nations  the  trouble  of  transporting  their  Skins  to  that  Bay.^ 
Upon  that  Lake  we  find  Copper  Mines,  the  Mettal  of  which 
is  fo  fine  and  plentiful,  that  there  is  not  a  feventh  part  lofs 
from  the  Oar.^  It  has  fome  pretty  large  Iflands,  which  are 
replenifh'd  with  Elks  and  wild  Affes ;  but  there's  fcarce  any 
that  goes  to  hunt  upon  'em,  by  reafon  of  the  danger  of 
croffing  over.  In  fine,  this  Lake  abounds  with  Sturgeons, 
Trouts,  and  white  Fifh.  The  Climate  is  unfufferably  cold 
for  fix  Months  of  the  year,  and  the  Snow  joyn'd  to  the  Froft, 
commonly  freezes  the  Water  of  the  Lake  for  ten  or  twelve 
Leagues  over. 

[215]  From  the  Siiperiour  or  Upper  Lake,  I  fteer  to  that  of 
Hurons,  to  which  I  allot  four  hundred  Leagues  In  Circumfer- 
ence. Now  to  make  this  Lake,  you  muft  fail  down  by  the  fall 
call'd  Saut  St.  Mary,  which  I  defcrib'd  in  my  fifteenth  Letter. 
This  Lake  is  fituated  in  a  fine  Climate,  as  you'll  perceive  from 


^  Kamanistiquia  (Camanistigoyan)  was  the  site  of  Duluth's  first  western  fort, 
erected  in  1678.  It  was  later  abandoned  until  1717,  when  the  Canadian  authorities 
sent  Sieur  de  la  Noue  to  restore  it.  This  post  was  maintained  throughout  the  French 
regime,  and  was  the  site  of  the  famous  Fort  William,  the  North  West  Company's 
headquarters  well  into  the  nineteenth  century.  It  was  at  the  mouth  of  Three  Rivers, 
and  commanded  the  Grand  Portage  route  to  the  interior,  along  what  is  now  the 
boundary  between  Minnesota  and  Ontario.  The  locations  on  Lahontan's  map  are 
obviously  incorrect.  — Ed. 

2  For  early  copper  mines  on  the  shores  of  Lake  Superior,  consult  fVis.  Hist.  Colls. , 
xvi,  xvii.  —  Ed. 


to  iV<?r^Z>- America.  317 

the  Map.  The  North  fide  of  it  is  beft  for  the  Navigation  of 
Canows,  by  reafoii  of  the  frequency  of  Ifles  which  afford 
fhelter  in  bad  Weather.  The  South  fide  is  pleafanter,  and 
more  convenient  for  the  Hunting  of  Deer,  which  are  there 
very  plentiful.  The  figure  of  this  Lake  comes  near  to  an 
equilateral  Triangle.  Of  all  its  Ifles,  that  call'd  ManitouaUn^ 
is  the  moft  confiderable,  being  above  twenty  Leagues  long, 
and  ten  broad.  In  former  times,  the  Otitaoiias  of  the  Nations 
of  Talon  and  Sable  dwelt  in  it ;  but  the  dread  they  were  under 
upon  the  account  of  the  Iroquefe^  oblig'd  both  them  and  their 
Neighbours  to  retire  to  MiJfiUmakinac.  That  part  of  the  Con- 
tinent that  faces  this  Ifland,  is  inhabited  by  the  Nockcs  and  the 
Mijfitagues,  in  two  different  Villages,  which  are  twenty  Leagues 
diftant,  the  one  from  the  other.^  Towards  the  Eaft  end  of 
this  Ifland,  we  fall  in  with  the  River  des  Francois^  which  I  took 
notice  of  in  my  fixteenth  Letter.  'Tis  as  broad  as  the  Seine  is 
at  Paris,  and  runs  not  above  forty  Leagues  in  length  from  its 
fource  in  the  Lake  Nepicerini,  to  its  Mouth.  To  the  North- 
Wefl:  of  this  River,  there  lies  the  Bay  of  Toranto,  which  is 
twenty,  or  five  and  twenty  Leagues  long,  and  fifteen  broad  at 
its  Mouth.  This  Bay  receives  a  River  that  fprings  from  a 
little  Lake  of  the  fame  name,  and  forms  feveral  Catarads  that 


^  For  Manitoulin  Island  and  its  inhabitants,  see  p.  i^^,  note  2,  ante.  The  Nocke 
(Noquets)  were  an  Algonquian  tribe  that  early  merged  with  others  of  the  same  family 
—  see  fFis.  Hist.  Colls.,  xvi,  pp.  117,  360;  they  left  their  name  upon  two  bays  in 
Upper  Michigan.  The  Mississagua  occupied  the  north  shore  of  Lake  Huron,  and 
later  built  villages  in  the  peninsula  between  Lakes  Erie  and  Ontario.  In  1901  they 
numbered  about  eight  hundred,  settled  upon  reservations  in  Ontario.  —  Ed. 


3i8  Some  New  Voyages 

are  equally  impradlicable  both  upon  the  afcent  and  defcent.^ 
Upon  the  fide  of  this  River  you'll  fee  a  Man's  Head  mark'd 
in  my  Map,  which  fignifies  a  large  Village  of  the  Hurotts,  that 
was  deftroy'd  by  the  Iroquefe.  You  may  go  from  the  fource 
of  this  River  to  the  [216]  Lake  Frontenac^  by  making  a  Land- 
carriage  to  the  River  of  Tanaouate,  that  falls  into  that  Lake.^ 
LTpon  the  South  fide  of  the  Bay  of  Toronto^  you  fee  the  Fort 
call'd  Fort  Suppofe,  which  I  mention'd  in  my  23^  Letter,  and 
about  thirty  Leagues  to  the  Southward  of  that,  you  find  the 
Country  of  Theonontate,  which  being  formerly  inhabited  by  the 
Hiirons,  was  entirely  depopulated  by  the  Iroquefe.^ 

From  thence  I  pafs  dire6lly  to  my  Fort,  without  amufing 
you  with  the  different  Landskips  I  met  with  in  the  fpace  of 
thirty  Leagues.  That  Fort  I  have  fpoke  fo  often  of  already, 
that  without  fl;opping  there,  I  fiiall  run  diredly  to  the  Bay  of 
SakinaCy  reckoning  it  needlefs  at  the  fame  time,  to  take  any 
notice  of  the  many  Shelves  and  Rocks  that  lye  hid  under  the 
Water  for  two  Leagues  off  the  Coaft.  This  Bay  is  fixteen  or 
feventeen  Leagues  long,  and  fix  broad  at  its  Mouth  :  In  the 
middle  of  which  we  meet  with  two  little  Iflands,  that  are  very 
ferviceable  to  the  Paffengers  ;  for  if  it  were  not  for  the  con- 


^  Concerning  the  Bay  of  Toronto,  see  p.  273,  note  i,  ante.  The  text  should 
read  southwest,  instead  of  northwest.  —  Ed. 

2  Lake  Toronto  is  the  modern  SImcoe,  whence  the  entire  region  was  often 
called  Toronto ;  see  Scadding,  Toronto  of  Old  (Toronto,  1893).  The  "River  of 
Tanouate,"  which  appears  upon  a  map  of  1746,  is  to  be  identified  with  the  chain  of 
lakes  ending  in  Trent  River,  falling  into  Quinte  Bay.  Lahontan's  reference  may  be 
to  the  present  Humber  River,  as  the  Toronto  portage  was  used  upon  both  or  either  of 
these  routes.  —  Ed. 

3  See  p.  154,  note  2,  ante.  —  Ed. 


to  iVor//6- America.  319 

veniency  of  putting  in  there,  they  would  be  oblig'd  for  the 
mofl  part,  rather  to  march  quite  round  the  Bay,  than  to  run 
the  hazard  of  crofling  diredly  over  in  a  Canow.^  The  River 
of  Sakinac  falls  into  the  bottom  of  the  Bay.  This  River  runs 
fixty  Leagues  in  length,  with  a  gentle  Current,  having  only 
three  little  Catara6ls  that  one  may  fhoot  without  danger.  'Tis 
as  broad  as  the  Seine  is  at  Seve  Bridge.  Once  in  two  years  the 
Ontaoiias  and  the  Htirons^  are  wont  to  hunt  great  quantities  of 
Beavers  upon  the  confines  of  the  River  of  Sakinac.  Between 
the  River  I  now  fpeak  of,  and  MiJfiHmakinac^  we  meet  with  no 
place  that  is  worth  our  regard.  As  for  MijfiUmakinac  it  felf,  I 
have  already  imparted  to  you  all  that  I  can  fay  of  that  Pofl, 
which  is  of  fo  great  importance  to  our  Commerce,  and  at  the 
fame  time  fent  you  a  draught  of  it.  I  fliall  therefore  purfue 
my  courfe  to  the  Lake  Errie,  remembring  that  I  [217]  de- 
fcrib'd  the  Ilinefe  Lake  in  my  fixteenth  Letter. 

The  Lake  Errie  is  juftly  dignified  v/ith  the  illuftrious  name 
of  Conti;  for  afTuredly  'tis  the  fineft  Lake  upon  Earth.  You 
may  judge  of  the  goodnefs  of  the  Climate,  from  the  Latitudes 
of  the  Countries  that  furround  it.  Its  Circumference  extends 
to  two  hundred  and  thirty  Leagues ;  but  it  affords  every 
where  fuch  a  charming  Profped,  that  its  Banks  are  deck'd 
with  Oak-Trees,  Elms,  Chefnut-Trees,  Walnut-Trees,  Apple- 
Trees,  Plum-Trees,  and  Vines  which  bear  their  fine  clufters  up 
to  the  very  top  of  the  Trees,  upon  a  fort  of  ground  that  lies 
as  fmooth  as  one's  Hand.     Such  Ornaments  as  thefe,  are  fuffi- 


^  See  p.  143,  ante.     The  islands  were  probably  those  now  known  as  the  Charity 
group.  —  Ed. 


320  Some  New  Voyages 

cient  to  give  rife  to  the  moft  agreeable  Idea  of  a  Landskip  in 
the  World.  I  cannot  exprefs  what  vaft  quantities  of  Deer 
and  Turkeys  are  to  be  found  in  thefe  Woods,  and  in  the 
vaft  Meads  that  lye  upon  the  South  fide  of  the  Lake.  At  the 
bottom  of  the  Lake,  we  find  wild  Beeves  upon  the  Banks  of 
two  pleafant  Rivers  that  difembogue  into  it,  without  Cataradls 
or  rapid  Currents.  It  abounds  with  Sturgeon  and  white  Fifh  ; 
but  Trouts  are  very  fcarce  in  it,  as  well  as  the  other  Fifh  that 
we  take  in  the  Lakes  of  Hiirons  and  Ilinefe.  'Tis  clear  of 
Shelves,  Rocks,  and  Banks  of  Sand ;  and  has  fourteen  or  fif- 
teen fathom  Water.  The  Savages  afifure  us,  that  'tis  never 
difturb'd  with  high  Winds,  but  in  the  Months  of  December^ 
January^  and  February^  and  even  then  but  feldom,  which  indeed 
I  am  very  apt  to  believe,  for  we  had  but  very  few  Storms, 
when  I  winter'd  in  my  Fort  in  1688,  though  the  Fort  lay  open 
to  the  Lake  of  Hiirons.  The  Banks  of  this  Lake  are  com- 
monly frequented  by  none  but  Warriours,  whether  the  Iroquefe, 
the  Ilinefe^  the  Oumamis,  (sfc.  and  'tis  very  dangerous  to  ftop 
there.  By  this  means  it  comes  to  pafs,  that  the  Stags,  Roe- 
Bucks  and  Turkeys,  run  in  great  Bodies  up  and  down  the 
fhoar,  all  round  the  Lake.  In  former  times  the  Errieronons, 
[218]  and  Xho.  Andaftogueronons^  liv'd  upon  the  Confines  of  this 
Lake,  but  they  were  extirpated  by  the  Iroquefe^  as  well  as  the 
other  Nations  mark'd  in  the  Map.^ 


^The  identity  of  the  Erie  nation  is  much  in  doubt  —  see  Jesuit  Relations,  xxi, 
pp.  313-315  ;  but  their  habitat  was  originally  south  of  Lake  Erie,  named  for  them. 
Andastes  was  a  generic  term  by  which  the  French  designated  a  congeries  of  tribes  in 
Pennsylvania,  among  whom  were  those  known  to  the  Dutch  as  Minquas,  and  to  the 


to  A^o;Y/6- America.  321 

Upon  the  North  fide  of  the  Lake  we  defcry  a  point  of 
Land,  that  fhoots  fifteen  Leagues  into  the  Main^;  and  about 
thirty  Leagues  beyond  that  to  the  Eafliward,  we  meet  with  a 
fmall  River  that  takes  its  rife  near  the  Bay  of  Gayiaraske^  in 
the  Lake  of  Frontenac ;  and  would  afford  a  fhort  pafTage  from 
the  one  Lake  to  the  other,  if  'twere  not  incumber'd  with  Cat- 
arads.^  From  thence  to  the  Streight  or  Mouth  of  the  Lake, 
you  have  thirty  Leagues ;  the  Streight  being  a  League  over, 
and  fourteen  Leagues  long.  Upon  this  Streight  you  fee  Fort 
Suppofe  mark'd  in  the  Map,  which  is  one  of  the  Forts  that  I 
mention'd  in  my  23*^  Letter.  From  that  imaginary  Fort  to 
the  River  of  Conde^  we  have  twenty  Leagues. 

The  River  of  Cond^  runs  fixty  Leagues  in  length  without 
Catara6ls,  if  we  may  credit  the  Savages,  who  afTur'd  me,  that 
one  may  go  from  its  fource  to  another  River  that  falls  into  the 
Sea,  without  any  other  Land-carriage  than  one  of  a  League  in 
length,  between  the  [one]  River  and  the  other.^  I  faw  only  the 
Mouth  of  the  firft  River,  where  our  Oiitaouas  tried  their  Limbs, 
as  I  told  you  in  my  fifteenth  Letter.  The  Iflands  that  you 
fee  mark'd   in  the  Map   at   the   bottom  of  the  Lake  Errie, 


English  as  Susquehannocks,  or  Conestogas.  All  these  tribes  were  of  Huron-Iroquois 
stock,  but  at  war  with  the  Five  Nations.  The  sufRx  ronons  (roanu)  signified  people, 
or  tribe.  —  Ed. 

^  For  Long  Point,  Lake  Erie,  see  p.  138,  ante.  —  Ed. 

^The  bay  which  Lahontan  calls  "  Ganaraske,"  is  usually  designated  upon  maps 
of  the  period  as  Ganadoke,  and  is  the  present  Hamilton  Bay,  or  rather  all  the  western 
end  of  Lake  Ontario.  It  seems  likely  that  the  river  must  be  the  present  Grand,  which, 
as  Lahontan  indicates,  was  too  rugged  for  a  trade  route.  —  Ed. 

'  For  the  River  of  Conde,  see  p.  155,  note  i,  ante.     Lahontan  has  here  a  confused 
notion  of  the  Ohio,  probably  taken  from  Indian  descriptions.  —  Ed. 
2i 


322  Some  New  Voyages 

are  replenifh'd  with  Roe-Bucks,  and  with  Fruit-Trees,  which 
nature  has  generoufly  provided,  in  order  to  entertain  the 
Turkeys,  Feafants  and  Deer  with  their  Fruit.  In  fine,  if  there 
were  a  clear  and  free  paffage  for  Veffels,  from  Quebec  to  this 
Lake,  it  might  be  made  the  fineft,  the  richeft,  and  the  mcft 
fertile  Kingdom  in  the  World :  For  over  and  above  all  the 
beauties  I  have  mention'd,  there  are  excellent  Silver  Mines 
about  twenty  Leagues  up  the  Country,  upon  a  certain  Hill, 
from  whence  the  Savages  brought  [219]  us  great  lumps,  that 
have  yielded  that  precious  Metal  with  little  wafte. 

From  the  Lake  Erri^,  I  fteer  my  courfe  to  that  of  Fronte- 
nac,  which  I  could  not  forbear  to  fpeak  of  in  my  feventh  and 
feventeenth  Letters.  This  Lake  (as  I  intimated  above)  is  180 
Leagues  in  Circumference,  its  figure  is  Oval,  and  its  depth 
runs  between  twenty  and  twenty  five  Fathom.  On  the  South 
fide  it  receives  feveral  little  Rivers,  particularly  thofe  of  the 
Tfonontouans,  of  the  Onnontagues,  and  of  the  Famine'^;  on  the 
North  fide  'tis  joyn'd  by  the  Rivers  of  Ganaraske,  and  of  Teo- 
nontate.  Its  fides  are  deck'd  with  tall  Trees,  and  the  ground 
is  indifferent  even  and  level,  for  it  has  no  fteep  Coafts.  On 
the  North  fide  we  meet  with  feveral  little  Gulfs.  You  may  go 
from  this  Lake  to  that  of  Hiirons^  by  going  up  the  River 
Tanaouate,  from  whence  you  have  a  Land-carriage  of  fix  or 
eight  Leagues  to  the  River  of  Toronto^  which  falls  into  it.  You 
may  hkewife  have  a  paffage  from  the  Lake  of  Frontenac^  to 
that  of  Errie^  through  the  Bay  of  Ganaraske,  by  making  a 


iThe  Genessee,  Oswego,  and  Salmon  Rivers,  New  York.      See  p.  72,  note  1, 
ante.  —  Ed. 


to  iVor^Z'- America.  323 

Land-carriage  from  thence  to  a  little  River  that's  full  of 
Cataradls.  The  Villages  of  the  Onnontagues,  Tfonontouans, 
Goyogouans,  and  Onnoyoiites,  are  not  far  diftant  from  the  Lake 
of  Frontenac}  Thefe  Iroquefe  Nations  are  very  advantageoufly 
feated.  They  have  a  pleafant  and  fertile  Country ;  but  they 
want  Roe-Bucks  and  Turkeys,  as  well  as  Fifh,  of  which  their 
Rivers  are  altogether  deftitute,  infomuch  that  they  are  forc'd 
to  fifh  in  the  Lake,  and  to  broil  or  dry  their  Fidi  with  a  Fire, 
in  order  to  keep  'em  and  tranfport  'em  to  their  Villages. 
They  are  in  like  manner  forc'd  to  range  out  of  their  own 
Territories,  in  queft  of  Beavers  in  the  Winter  time,  either 
towards  Ganaraske,  or  to  the  fides  of  the  Lake  of  Toronto,  or 
elfe  towards  the  great  River  of  the  Outaouas ;  where  'twould 
be  an  eafie  matter  to  cut  all  their  Throats,  by  purfuing 
the  courfe  I  laid  down  in  my  [220]  Letters.  I  have  already 
touch'd  upon  the  Forts  of  Frontenac  and  Niagara  ;  as  well  as 
upon  the  River  of  St.  Laurence,  which  here  takes  leave  of 
the  Lakes,  and  purfues  a  comparer  courfe  to  Monreal  and 
Quebec,  where  its  waters  mingling  with  thofe  of  the  Sea, 
become  fo  brackifh,  that  they  are  not  drinkable. 

It  remains  only  to  give  you  a  Defcription  of  Acadia,  and 
the  Ifland  of  Newfound-Land,  which  are  two  Countries  that 
diflfer  widely  from  one  another.  The  Coaft  of  Acadia  extends 
from  Kenebeki,  one  of  the  Frontiers  of  New-England,  to  Vljle 
Perch,  near  the  Mouth  of  the  River  of  St.  Laurence.  This 
Sea-Coaft  runs  almoft  three  hundred  Leagues  in  length,  and 

1  For  the  names  of  the  Iroquois  tribes,  seep.  58,  ante.  —  Ed. 


324  Some  New  Voyages 

has  upon  it  two  great  Navigable  Bays,  namely,  the  Bay  call'd 
Frangoife,  and  the  Bay  des  Chaleurs}  It  has  a  great  many  little 
Rivers,  the  Mouths  of  which  are  deep,  and  clean  enough  for 
the  greateft  Ships.  Thefe  Rivers  would  afford  a  plentiful 
Salmon-fifhery,  if  there  were  any  body  to  undertake  it ;  and 
moft  of  'em  as  well  as  the  Gulfs  that  lies  before  'em,  furniih 
fuch  Cods  as  we  take  at  the  IJle  Percee.  For  in  the  Summer 
time,  that  fort  of  Fifh  make  in  to  the  Coaft  in  Shoals,  efpe- 
cially  about  the  Iflands  of  Cape  Breton,  and  of  St.  John?  'Tis 
true,  the  latter  has  no  Harbours,  and  the  former  has  none 
that  receive  any  Veffel  above  the  burthen  of  a  Barque  ;  but  if 
thefe  two  Iflands  were  peopled,  the  Inhabitants  might  fit  out 
Sloops  to  manage  the  Fifhery ;  and  towards  the  latter  end  of 
Augiift,  when  the  Fifh  are  cur'd  and  ready,  the  Ships  might 
come  to  an  Anchor  near  the  Land,  and  fo  take  'em  in.  Two 
Gentlemen  of  the  name  oi  Amour  of  Quebec'^ ^h^iwe.  a  Settlement 


1  Bay  Franfaise  was  the  early  name  for  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  which  was  first  ade- 
quately explored  by  Champlain  (1604-08).  The  tercentenary  of  Champlain's  landfall 
on  the  shores  of  the  Bay  of  Fundy  was  appropriately  celebrated  in  June,  1904:  at 
Annapolis  Royal  (old  Port  Royal),  the  21st  and  22d,  by  the  Nova  Scotia  Historical 
Society  ;  at  St.  John,  the  23d  and  24th,  by  the  New  Brunswick  Historical  Society  ;  at 
Isle  St.  Croix,  at  the  head  of  Passamaquoddy  Bay,  the  2Sth,  by  the  Maine  Historical 
Society. 

The  Bay  of  Chaleurs  was  so  named  by  Cartier,  who  (1534)  experienced  great 
heat  therein.  —  Ed. 

2  St.  John  (St.  Jean)  was  the  present  Prince  Edward's  Island.  Harisse  has  shown 
{Decowverte  de  Terre-Newve)  that  the  former  name  was  first  (1505)  applied  to  the 
northeastern  portion  of  Cape  Breton  Island,  and  afterwards  by  a  misconception  given 
to  the  smaller  island  in  the  Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence.  Cape  Breton  was  the  name  used 
first  for  the  southeast  extremity  of  the  island,  now  known  by  that  name,  because  it  was 
the  haunt  of  certain  fishers  from  Brittany.  Later,  the  term  was  extended  to  the  entire 
island,  thus  succeeding  the  name  St.  John.  —  Ed. 

3  Three  sons  of  Mathieu  d' Amours,  councillor  of  the  King  at  Quebec,  received 


to  iV(?r/Z>- America.  325 

for  Beaver-hunting  upon  the  River  of  St.  John ;  which  is  a 
very  pleafant  River,  and  adorn'd  with  Fields  that  are  very 
fertile  in  Grain.  'Tis  Navigable  for  twelve  Leagues  up,  from 
its  Mouth.  Between  the  point  oi  Acadia^  and  the  Ifland  [221] 
of  Cape  Breton^  there  is  a  Channel  or  Streight  about  two 
Leagues  in  breadth,  which  is  deep  enough  to  carry  the  greateft 
Ships  in  France.  'Tis  call'd  the  pafs  des  Can/eaux,^  and  would 
be  much  more  frequented  than  it  is,  if  the  Merchant-men 
bound  to  Canada,  would  fet  out  from  France  about  the  i^th 
of  March;  for  then  they  might  pafs  that  way,  being  affur'd 
of  a  clear  paffage  at  all  feafons  of  the  year,  whereas  the  Chan- 
nel of  Cape  de  Raye,  is  oftentimes  cover'd  with  Ice  in  April : 
And  by  this  contrivance,  the  Ships  would  arrive  at  Quebec  in 
the  beginning  of  May. 

Moft  of  the  Countries  oi  Acadia  abound  with  Corn,  Peafe, 
Fruit,  and  Pulfe ;  and  have  a  plain  diftindlion  of  the  four 
Seafons  of  the  year,  nothwithftanding  that  'tis  extream  cold 
for  three  Months  in  Winter.  Several  places  of  Acadia,  afford 
Mafts  as  ftrong  as  thofe  we  have  from  Norway ;  and  if  there 
were  occafion,  all  forts  of  Ships  might  be  built  there  :  For  if 
you'll  believe  the  Carpenters,  the  Oak  of  that  Country  is 


grants  on  St.  John  River  in  i6i4,  and  established  what  was  known  as  "  seigneuries 
sauvages"  —  stations  for  trade,  hunting,  and  fishing — and  a  kind  of  pre-eminence 
over  the  neighboring  Indians.  Two  of  this  family,  Rene  and  Mathieu,  aided  (1696) 
in  the  defense  of  the  St.  John  against  the  English.  —  Ed. 

^  The  strait  of  Canso  (Campceaux,  Canseaux)  lies  between  Nova  Scotia  and 
Cape  Breton  Island.  The  word  is  undoubtedly  of  Indian  origin,  and  was  first  applied 
to  the  point  at  the  southeastern  extremity  of  the  mainland.  On  his  map  of  1612 
Champlain  called  the  strait  "  Le  Passage  Courant  ";  but  by  1632  it  appears  as  that  of 
Campseau.  —  Ed. 


326  Some  New  Voyages 

better  than  ours  in  Europe.     In  a  word,  'tis  a  very  fine  Coun- 
try;   the   CHmate  is  indifferent  temperate,  the  Air  is  pure 
and  wholefom,  the  Waters  clear  and  light,  and  there's  good 
accommodation  for  Hunting,  Shooting,  and  Fifhing.      The 
Animals  that  we  meet  with  there  moil  commonly,  are  Beavers, 
Otters,  and  Sea-Calves,  all  of  'em  being  very  numerous.    Thofe 
who  love  Meat  are  indebted  to  the  Dodlors,  who  perfwaded 
the  Popes  to   Metamorphofe   thefe  terreftrial   Animals   into 
Fifh;  for  they  are  allow'd  to  eat  of  'em  without  fcruple  in  the 
time  of  Lent.     To  be  plain,  the  knowledge  I  have  of  that 
Country,  makes  me  forefee  that  the  Englifa  will  be  mafters  of 
it  fome  time  or  other.    I  could  give  very  plaufible  reafons  for 
the  Prophecy.     They  have  already  begun  to  ruine  the  Com- 
merce that  the  French  had  with  the  Savages,  and  in  a  fhort 
time,  they'll  compafs  its  intire  Deftrudion.    The  [222]  French 
they  will  prize  their  Goods  too  high,  though  they  are  not  fo 
good  as  thofe  of  the  Englijh;  and  yet  the  Englifli  fell  their 
Commodities  cheaper.     'Twere  a  pity  that  we  fhould  tamely 
leave  to  the  Englifh  a  Country,  the  Conqueft  of  which  they 
have  attempted   fo  often,  in  confideration   of  our  Fur-trade 
and   Cod-fifhing.     'Tis   impofTible  to   hinder   'em   to   poflefs 
themfelves  of  the  Settlements  upon  the  Coaft  of  Acadia,  by 
reafon  that  they  lye  at  fuch  a  diftance  from  one  another ;  fo 
that  they'll  certainly  fucceed  in  fuch  Enterprifes,  as  indeed 
they  have  done  already.     The  French  Governours,  they  adl 
with  the  fame  view,  as  many  of  thofe  who  are  imploy'd  in 
Pofts  beyond  Sea.     They  look  upon  their  place  as  a  Gold 
Mine  given  'em,  in  order  to  enrich  themfelves ;   fo  that  the 


to  iVor^Zj- America.  327 

publick  Good,  muft  always  march  behind  private  Intereft. 
Mr.  de  Meneval  fuffer'd  the  EugliJIi  to  poffefs  themfelves  of 
Port  Royal^  becaufe  that  place  was  cover'd  with  nothing  but 
fingle  PalifTado's.  But  why  was  it  not  better  fortified  ?  I  can 
tell  you  the  reafon ;  he  thought  he  had  time  enough  to  fill 
his  Pockets,  before  the  Eugli/Ii  would  attack  it.  This  Gov- 
ernour  fucceeded  to  Mr.  Perrot^  who  was  broke  with  Difgrace, 
for  having  made  it  his  chief  bufinefs  to  enrich  himfelf;  and 
after  returning  to  France,  went  back  again  with  feveral  Ships 
laden  with  Goods,  in  order  to  fet  up  for  a  private  Merchant 
in  that  Country.  While  Mr.  Perrot  was  Governour,  he  fuf- 
fer'd the  Engli/Ji  to  poffefs  themfelves  of  feveral  advantageous 
Pofts,  without  offering  to  ftir.  His  chief  bufinefs  was  to  go 
in  Barques  from  River  to  River,  in  order  to  traffick  with  the 
Savages :  And  after  he  was  difgrac'd,  he  was  not  contented 
with  a  Commerce  upon  the  Coafts  of  Acadia,  but  would  needs 
extend  it  to  the  Engli/Ji  Plantations ;  but  it  coft  him  dear,  for 
fome  Pyrates  fell  in  with  him,  and  after  feizing  his  Barques, 
duck'd  himfelf,  upon  which  he  died  immediately.^ 

[223]  The  three  principal  Savage  Nations  that  live  upon 
the  Coafts  of  Acadia,  are  the  Abenakis,  the  Mikemak,  and  the 
Canibas}    There  are  fome  other  erratick  Nations,  who  go  and 


^  For  a  sketch  of  Perrot  see  p.  53,  note  2,  ante;  it  is  generally  believed  that 
Lahontan's  strictures  upon  his  rapacious  conduct  are  justifiable.  He  was  not  killed 
by  the  pirates  (1690),  but  rescued  by  a  French  privateer,  being  again  in  Acadia  in 
1691.     See  A''.  Y.  Col.  Docs.,  ix,  p.  475.  —  Ed. 

2  Abenaki  was  a  generic  term  for  the  Algonquian  Indians  of  Maine  and  New 
Brunswick.  They  were  a  powerful  but  mild  people,  dwelling  in  villages  when  first 
encountered  by  the  French ;  but  later  losing  their  village  habit  to  some  extent,  under 
the  influence  of  the  French,  who  induced  them  to  revert  to  the  hunting  stage,  in  the 


328  Some  New  Foyages 

come  from  Acadia^  to  New-England^  and  go  by  the  names  of 
Mahingans,  Soccokis,  and  Openango}  The  firft  three  (having 
fix'd  Habitations)  are  intirely  in  the  interefts  of  the  French ; 
and  I  muft  fay,  that  in  time  of  War  they  gall  the  Englijh  Col- 
onies with  their  Incurfions,  fo  much,  that  we  ought  to  take 
care  to  perpetuate  a  good  underftanding  between  them  and 
us.  The  Baron  of  Saint  Cajieins,  a  Gentleman  of  Oleron  in 
Beam,  having  liv'd  among  the  Abenakis  after  the  Savage  way, 
for  above  twenty  years,  is  fo  much  refpe6ted  by  the  Savages, 
that  they  look  upon  him  as  their  Tutelar  God.^  He  was  for- 
merly an  Officer  of  the  Carignan  Regiment  in  Canada;  and 
upon  the  breaking  of  that  Regiment,  threw  himfelf  among 
the  Savages,  whofe  Language  he  had  learn'd.  He  married 
among  'em  after  their  fafhion,  and  prefer'd  the  Forrefts  of 

interest  of  the  all-absorbing  fur-trade.  The  name  Abenaki  is  said  to  mean  "  people 
of  the  East."  See  Vetromile,  Abnakis  and  their  History  (New  York,  1866); 
Maurault,  Histoire  des  Abenakis  (1866).  They  are  now  represented  by  the  Penobscot 
and  Passamaquoddy  Indians  in  Maine,  and  a  few  at  the  mission  village  in  Canada. 
See  p.  49,  note  i,  ante. 

The  Micmac  were  dwellers  in  Nova  Scotia  and  Cape  Breton —  a  large  confeder- 
ated tribe,  of  whom  Membertou  was  the  chief  when  Port  Royal  was  founded  (1605) . 
They  were  frequently  called  Souriquois  by  the  French,  and  not  only  were  devoted  to 
the  latter's  interests,  but  many  were  converted  to  Christianity. 

The  Canibaswere  an  Abenaki  tribe  settled  around  Naroutsouat  (Norridgewock), 
Maine.     Their  name  was  a  variant  of  Kennebec.  —  Ed. 

^  See  p.  90,  note  r ,  ante.  —  Ed. 

2  Jean  Vincent  St.  Castin,  of  whom  Lahontan  gives  so  succinct  an  account,  was 
born  about  1636,  and  settled  in  the  forests  of  Maine  in  1667.  After  1676  he  was  com- 
mandant of  Pentagoet,  the  French  fort  upon  the  Penobscot.  For  many  years  he 
traded  with  the  English,  but  aided  his  own  people  in  King  William's  War  (1689-97), 
leading  his  savage  allies  against  the  English  settlements.  Late  in  the  century  he 
inherited  a  considerable  fortune  in  France,  whither  he  returned  about  1700.  His  son 
Anselm  succeeded  to  his  influence  among  the  Penobscot  Indians,  to  whom  he  was 
allied  on  his  mother's  side.     See  Maine  Hist.  Colls.,  vii,  pp.  42-72.  —  Ed. 


to  North' h.m.^nc2i.  329 

Acadia  to  the  Pyrenean  Mountains,  that  encompafs  the  place 
of  his  Nativity  :  For  the  firft  years  of  his  abode  with  the  Sav- 
ages, he  behav'd  himfelf  fo,  as  to  draw  an  inexpreflible  efteem 
from  'em.  They  made  him  their  Great  Chief  or  Leader,  who 
is  in  a  manner  the  Soveraign  of  the  Nation ;  and  by  degrees 
he  has  work'd  himfelf  into  fuch  a  Fortune,  which  any  Man 
but  he  would  have  made  fuch  ufe  of,  as  to  draw  out  of  that 
Country  above  two  or  three  hundred  thoufand  Crowns,  which 
he  has  now  in  his  Pocket  in  good  dry  Gold.  But  all  the  ufe 
he  makes  of  it,  is,  to  buy  up  Goods  for  Prefents  to  his  Fel- 
low-Savages, who  upon  their  return  from  Hunting,  prefent 
him  with  Beaver-Skins  to  a  treble  value.  The  Governours 
General  of  Canada  keep  in  with  him,  and  the  Governours  of 
New-England  are  afraid  of  him.  He  has  feveral  Daughters, 
who  are,  all  of  [224]  'em,  married  very  handfomly  to  French- 
men, and  had  good  Dowries.  He  has  never  chang'd  his 
Wife ;  by  which  means  he  mean'd  to  give  the  Savages  to 
underftand,  that  God  do's  not  love  inconftant  Folks.  'Tis 
faid,  that  he  indeavour'd  to  convert  thefe  poor  People,  but 
his  indeavours  prov'd  fuccefslefs ;  fo  that  'tis  in  vain  for  the 
Jefuits  to  preach  up  the  Truths  of  Chriftianity  to  'em; 
though  after  all,  thefe  good  Fathers  are  not  difcourag'd,  nay, 
they  think  that  the  adminiftring  of  Baptifm  to  a  dying  Child, 
is  worth  ten  times  the  pains  and  uneafmefs  of  living  among 
that  People.^ 


1  Lahontan  here  belittles  the  Jesuit  missions,  which  nevertheless  had  a  consider- 
able success  among  the  Acadian  Indians.  Druiliettes  began  his  visits  to  the  Kennebec 
about  1646,  and  by  1680  a  large  number  of  converts  had  been  removed  to  the  mission 


330  Some  New  Voyages 

Port-Royal^  the  Capital  or  the  only  City  of  Acadia^  is  in 
effedt  no  more  than  a  little  paultry  Town,^  that  is  fomewhat 
inlarg'd  fince  the  War  broke  out  in  1689.  by  the  acceflion  of 
the  Inhabitants  that  liv'd  near  Bojlon,  the  Metropolitan  of 
New-England.  A  great  many  of  thefe  People  retir'd  to  Port- 
Royal,  upon  the  apprehenfion  that  the  Englijh  would  pillage 
'em,  and  carry  'em  into  their  Country.  Mr.  de  Meneval  fur- 
rendred  this  place  to  the  Engli/Ii,  as  I  faid  before ;  he  could 
not  maintain  fuch  a  pofb  with  the  handful  of  Men  that  he  had, 
becaufe  the  Paliffadoes  were  low,  and  out  of  order.  He 
made  a  Capitulation  with  the  Commander  of  the  Party  that 
made  the  Attack ;  but  the  Engli/h  Officer  broke  his  word  to 
him,  and  us'd  him  both  ignominioufly  and  harfhly.^  Port- 
Royal  is  feated  in  the  Latitude  of  44  Degrees,  and  40  Min- 
utes, upon  the  edge  of  a  very  fine  Bafin,^  which  is  a  League 

colony.     See  p.  49,  note  i,  ante.     For  a  fuller  account  of  the  Acadian  mission,  see 
Jesuit  Relations,  i,  Introduction.  —  Ed. 

1  For  a  good  summary  of  the  history  of  Port  Royal,  the  settlement  at  which  was 
decided  upon  in  1604,  but  not  actually  undertaken  until  the  following  year,  see 
Hannay,  History  of  Acadia  (St.  John,  N.  B.,  1879);  Hannay,  Story  of  Acadia 
(Kentville,  N.  S.,  1904);  Acadiensis  (special  number,  June,  1904);  Savary,  History 
of  the  County  of  Annapolis  (Toronto,  1897).  The  census  of  1686  gave  885  persons 
in  all  Nova  Scotia,  of  whom  592  were  at  Port  Royal,  exclusive  of  30  soldiers.  See 
Suite,  Les  Canadiens  Franqais  (Montreal,  1882),  vi,  pp.  8,  9.  —  Ed. 

2  The  reference  is  here  to  the  siege  of  Port  Royal  by  Sir  William  Phips  in  May, 
1690.  Menneval,  son  of  the  Baron  de  Portneuf,  had  but  recently  succeeded  Perrot  as 
governor  of  Acadia.  The  fort  was  inefficiently  garrisoned  and  provisioned,  and  was 
entirely  unable  to  resist  the  demand  for  surrender  made  by  the  well-equipped  English 
fleet.  The  charge  that  Phips  broke  the  terms  of  capitulation,  seems  to  be  sustained. 
Menneval  was  carried  captive  to  Boston,  where  after  a  short  imprisonment  he  was  sent 
to  England,  afterwards  exchanged,  and  returned  to  Canada,  where  he  was  useful  in 
affording  information  of  New  England  conditions.  —  Ed. 

3  First  called  Port  Royal  Basin,  but  now  Annapolis  Basin.  Situated  on  the 
northwest  coast  of  Nova  Scotia,  and  pouring  its  enormous  tide  into  the  Bay  of  Fundy 


to  iVor^^- America.  331 

broad,  and  two  Leagues  long,  having  at  the  entry  about  fix- 
teen  or  eighteen  fathom  Water  on  one  fide,  and  fix  or  feven 
on  the  other ;  for  you  muft  know  that  the  Ifland  call'd  rijle 
aux  Chevres  which  ftands  in  the  middle,  divides  the  Channel 
into  two.  There's  excellent  anchorage  all  over  the  Bafin ; 
and  at  the  bottom  of  it,  there's  a  Cape  or  point  of  Land  that 
parts  two  Rivers,  at  which  the  tide  rifes  ten  or  [225]  twelve 
Foot.  Thefe  Rivers  are  bounded  by  pleafant  Meads,  which 
in  Spring  and  Autumn  are  cover'd  with  all  forts  of  frefh 
Water-foul.  In  fine,  Port-Royal  is  only  a  handful  of  Houfes 
two  Story  high,  and  has  but  few  Inhabitants  of  any  Note. 
It  fubfifts  upon  the  traffick  of  the  Skins,  which  the  Savages 
bring  thither  to  truck  for  European  Goods.  In  former 
times,  the  Farmer's  Company  had  Magazins  in  this  place, 
which   were   under   the   care    of    the    Governours.     I    could 


through  the  narrow  Digby  Gut,  this  strikingly-beautiful  fjord  appealed  strongly  to 
the  French  explorers  —  De  Monts,  Champlain,  and  Poutrincourt  —  who  discovered 
it  about  the  twenty-fourth  of  June,  1604.  Poutrincourt  obtained  from  De  Monts  a 
grant  of  the  region,  and  determined  to  settle  there;  but  the  ill-fated  winter  of  1604-05 
was  actually  spent  by  the  party  on  Island  St.  Croix,  at  the  mouth  of  St.  Croix  River, 
where  it  empties  into  Passamaquoddy  Bay.  The  next  year,  the  remnant  of  the  com- 
pany settled  on  Poutrincourt's  grant,  on  the  shores  of  Annapolis  Basin.  This  first 
settlement  of  the  French  in  Canada  was  on  the  mainland,  in  Lower  Granville,  oppo- 
site Goat  Island  (the  "  Isle  aux  Chevres"  of  our  author),  about  seven  miles  below 
and  on  the  opposite  shore  to  the  present  Annapolis  Royal,  at  the  head  of  the  basin  — 
whither  the  colony  removed  in  later  years.  Annapolis  Basin  was  too  far  removed 
from  the  fur  trade  of  the  interior,  also  was  subject  to  English  attacks,  for  which  reasons 
Champlain  wisely  decided  to  found  Quebec  (1608)  as  the  capital  of  New  France. 

Along  the  east  shore  of  the  basin  is  now  a  continuous  and  prosperous  farming 
community,  chiefly  the  descendants  of  early  Scotch,  settlers  and  American  Loyalists, 
with  several  small  towns.  Digby  is  a  considerable  summer  resort,  chiefly  for  New 
Englanders;  Annapolis  Royal  (1000  inhabitants)  is  a  quiet  market  town.  Concern- 
ing the  tercentenary  celebration  of  the  landfall  of  the  early  French,  see  p.  324,  note  i, 
ante.  —  Ed. 


332  Some  New  Voyages 

eafily  mention  fome  of  'em,  if  I  were  not  apprehenfive  that 
thefe  Memoirs  may  be  feen  by  others  befides  your  felf. 

The  Ifland  of  Newfound-Land^  is  three  hundred  Leagues 
in  Circumference.  It  lies  at  the  diftance  of  fix  hundred  and 
fifty  Leagues  from  France^  and  forty  or  fifty  Leagues  from 
the  Bank  of  the  fame  name.  The  South  fide  of  the  Ifland 
belongs  to  the  French^  who  have  feveral  Settlements  there  for 
the  fifhing  of  Cod.  The  Eaft  fide  is  inhabited  by  the  Englijh^ 
who  are  poffefs'd  of  feveral  confiderable  Pofts,  fituated  in 
certain  Ports,  Bays,  and  Havens,  which  they  have  taken  care 
to  fortifie.  The  Wefl  of  the  Ifland  is  wafte,  and  was  never  yet 
pofTefs'd.  The  Ifland  is  of  a  triangular  Figure,  and  full  of 
Mountains,  and  impracticable  Forrefl;s.  It  has  fome  great 
Meadows,  or  rather  Heaths,  which  are  covered  with  a  fort  of 
Mofs  infl:ead  of  Grafs.  The  Soil  of  this  Country  is  good  for 
nothing,  as  being  a  mixture  of  Gravel,  Sand  and  Stones  ;  fo 
that  the  Fifhery  was  the  only  motive  that  induc'd  the  French 
and  the  Englifli  to  fettle  there.  It  affords  great  ftore  of  Game, 
for  Water-fowl,  Patridges  and  Hairs ;  but  as  for  the  Stags, 
'tis  almofl:  impofiible  to  come  at  'em,  by  reafon  that  the 
Mountains  are  fo  high,  and   the  Woods  fo  thick.^     In  this 


^The  area  of  Newfoundland,  which  in  its  extreme  length  from  north  to  south  is 
350  miles  and  in  its  average  breadth  from  east  to  west  130  miles,  is  40,200  square 
miles.  Its  population  in  1901  was  216,215,  for  the  most  part  littoral;  the  interior 
being  still  a  wilderness,  chiefly  forested,  although  there  are  several  broad  rocky 
plateaus  which  yield  little  beyond  moss  and  low-growing  shrubs.  The  lumbering 
industry  is  being  rapidly  developed,  the  lakes  and  rivers  furnishing  easy  limber  high- 
ways to  mill  and  port;  mining  interests  are  also  fast  growing  in  importance  —  the 
present  annual  output  of  copper,  pyrites,  iron  ore,  and  other  products  amounting  to  a 
million  dollars;  under  recent  governmental  bounties,  the  area  of  cultivation  has  been 


to  N orth- Am^nQ2i,  333 

Ifland,  as  well  as  in  that  of  Cape  Breton^  we  find  Porphyry  of 
feveral  colours ;  and  care  has  been  taken  to  fend  to  prance 
fome  pieces  of  it  for  a  Pattern,  which  were  [226]  found  to  be 
very  pretty,  only  they  were  hard  to  cut.  I  have  feen  fome  of 
'em  that  were  red  flreak'd  with  green,  and  feem'd  to  be 
extream  fine  ;  but  the  mifchief  is,  it  fplits  fo  when  'tis  taken 
out  of  the  Quarries,  that  it  cannot  be  made  ufe  of,  but  by  way 
of  incruftation. 

This  Ifland  of  Cape  Breton  affords  likewife  black  Marble, 
or  a  fort  of  Brefche  with  grey  Veins,  which  is  hard,  and  not 


extended  to  upwards  of  100,000  acres,  largely  along  the  coast,  by  fishermen  ;  the 
fisheries,  however,  are,  as  in  Lahontan's  day,  still  the  chief  industry,  employing  in 
all  branches  of  that  pursuit  nearly  60,000  of  the  inhabitants — while  American,  French, 
and  a  few  Portuguese  vessels  are  also  engaged  in  the  catch.  The  total  annual  value  of 
the  cod-fish  catch  in  this  region  is  $10,000,000,  Newfoundland's  share  being  $600,000  ; 
to  these,  may  be  added  herring,  lobsters,  seal,  and  whale  —  while  the  interior  waters 
abound  in  salmon  and  trout,  which  attract  tourists  from  Canada,  England,  and  the 
United  States.  The  principal  manufacturing  establishments  are  in  St.  Johns ;  but 
factories  for  canning  lobsters,  and  making  seal  and  cod-liver  oil,  and  guano,  are 
numerous  along  the  coast.  The  island  is  for  the  most  part  a  plateau,  creased  by 
numerous  river  gorges  and  lake  basins,  and  capped  by  a  few  mountains  of  not  more 
than  2000  feet  above  sea-level,  with  a  deeply-indented,  fjord-like  coast  —  more 
rugged  on  the  west,  north,  and  east  sides  than  on  the  south.  The  numerous  fjords 
are  valuable  to  fishermen  as  land-locked  harbors,  and  the  population,  as  in  Norway, 
clings  closely  to  the  ragged  fringe  of  shore.  For  a  century  and  a  half,  French  fisher- 
men have  controlled  the  west  and  north  coasts,  from  Cape  Ray  to  Notre  Dame  Bay  ; 
but  a  recent  treaty  between  England  and  France  (1904)  has  effectively  disposed  of  this 
long-pending  source  of  discontent  on  the  part  of  the  English  residents,  and  England 
now  dominates  (or  will,  when  the  stipulation  is  formally  confirmed  by  both  parlia- 
ments) the  entire  island.  Newfoundland  is  not  a  part  of  the  Dominion  of  Canada, 
preferring  to  remain  a  separate  colony  of  the  British  Empire.  Reid's  Transinsular 
Railroad  (narrow  gauge),  built  in  1893-98,  now  runs  from  Port-au-Basques  to  St. 
Johns,  but  thus  far  has  had  but  slight  effect  in  developing  the  island,  for  the  cheaper 
water  carriage  is  still  quite  generally  preferred.  Labrador  is  owned  by  Newfoundland, 
and  many  of  the  tourists  who  now  flock  to  the  island  for  fishing  and  hunting,  take 
pleasure  trips  on  Newfoundland  steamers  as  far  north  as  Nain.  —  Ed. 


334  Some  New  Voyages 

eafily  pollfh'd.^  This  Stone  is  apt  to  fplit,  for  'tis  not  equally 
hard,  and  it  has  knots  in  it.  There  are  no  fetled  Savages  in 
the  Ifland  of  Newfound-Land}  'Tis  true,  the  Eskimatix  do 
fometimes  crofs  over  to  it  at  the  Streight  of  Belle  IJle  in  great 
Sloops,  with  intent  to  furprife  the  Crew  of  the  Fifhermen 
upon  the  Coaft  call'd  Petit  Nord.  Our  Settlements  are  at 
Placentia,  at  the  Ifland  of  St.  Peter,  and  in  the  Bay  of  Trepajfez? 
From  Cape  Rafe  to  Chapeau  Rouge,  the  Coafl  is  very  clean,  but 
from  Chapeau  Rouge  to  Cape  Rafe,  the  Rocks  render  it  dan- 
gerous.^ There  are  two  confiderable  Inconveniences,  that 
attend  the  landing  upon  this  Ifland.  In  the  firft  place,  the 
Fogs  are  here  fo  thick  in  the  Summer,  for  twenty  Leagues  off 
into  the  Main,  that  the  ablefl:  and  moft  expert  Sailor  dare  not 
fl:and  into  the  Land  while  they  lafl: :  So  that  all  Ships  are 
oblig'd  to  lye  bye  for  a  clear  day,  in  order  to  make  the  Land. 


1  The  author  probably  means  breccia,  a  conglomerate  of  angular  fragments.  — Ed. 

2  The  aborigines  of  Newfoundland  were  few  in  number,  and  occupied  chiefly  the 
northern  portion.  They  were  known  to  the  early  French  as  Beothics,  and  exhibited 
an  ineradicable  hatred  of  ihe  whites.  After  an  act  of  treachery  on  their  part,  in  i8io, 
they  were  nearly  all  exterminated.  —  Ed. 

^  For  Placentia,  see  p.  275,  note  i,  ante.  The  little  island  of  St.  Pierre  was  one 
of  the  earliest  visited  by  French  lishers  in  the  sixteenth  century,  and  by  1670  became 
a  permanent  French  settlement,  with  slight  fortifications.  After  the  Treaty  of  Utrecht 
(1713),  all  French  inhabitants  were  expelled;  but  in  1763,  the  islands  of  St.  Pierre 
and  Miquelon  were  retroceded  to  France,  as  a  refuge  for  fishermen  ;  the  sovereignty 
is  still  in  her  hands,  these  now  being,  after  the  Newfoundland  French  Shore  treaty 
(1904),  her  only  possessions  in  North  America,  save  those  in  the  West  Indies. 

Trepassey  Bay  is  the  first  large  indentation  southwest  of  Cape  Race.  The  per- 
manent French  settlement  here  was  broken  up  in  1713.  See  Prowse,  History  of  Neiv- 
foundland  (London,  1895),  P-  542-  —  Ed. 

*The  first  should  be  Cape  Ray,  not  Race.  Chapeau  Rouge  is  the  extremity  of 
the  great  peninsula  between  Fortune  and  Placentia  Bays.  Eastward  from  this  point, 
the  coast  is  more  wild  and  rocky  than  that  to  the  west.  — Ed. 


to  North'Kvn^vicdi,  335 

The  fecond  Inconveniency,  which  is  yet  greater,  proceeds 
from  the  Currents  which  run  to  and  again,  without  any  per- 
ceivable variation,  by  which  means  the  Ships  are  fometimes 
drove  in  upon  the  Coaft,  when  they  reckon  upon  ten  Leagues 
offing.  But,  which  is  worft  of  all,  the  infenfible  motion  of  the 
rowling  Waves,  throw's  'em  infenfibly  upon  the  Rocks,  which 
they  cannot  poffibly  avoid,  for  want  of  ground  to  anchor 
upon.  'Twas  by  this  means  that  the  King's  Ship  the  Pretty 
was  loft  in  1692,  as  well  as  a  great  many  others  upon  feveral 
occafions.^ 

[227]  Of  all  our  Settlements  in  l>^or\h-America,  Placentia  is 
the  Poft  of  the  greateft  Importance  and  Service  to  the  King, 
in  regard  that  'tis  a  place  of  refuge  to  the  Ships  that  are 
oblig'd  to  put  into  a  Harbour,  when  they  go  or  come  from 
Canada^  and  even  to  thofe  which  come  from  South-^wmc^, 
when  they  want  to  take  in  frefh  Water  or  Provifions,  and 
have  fprung  their  Maft,  or  been  dammag'd  in  a  Storm.  This 
place  is  fituated  in  the  Latitude  of  47  Degrees,  and  fome 
Minutes,  almoft  at  the  bottom  of  the  Bay  that  goes  by  the 
fame  name.  The  Bay  is  ten  or  twelve  Leagues  broad,  and 
twenty  odd  Leagues  long.  The  Fort  ftands  upon  the  fide  of 
a  Neck  or  narrow  Streight,  which  is  fixty  Paces  over,  and  fix 
Fathoms  water  deep.  The  Ships  that  enter  into  the  Port, 
are  oblig'd  to  graze,  (fo  to  fpeak)  upon  the  angle  of  the 
Baftions.     The   Port  or  Harbour  is  a  League  long,  and   a 


iThis  was  probably  the  ship  "Joli,"  which  under  command  of  Monsieur 
Beaujeu  conveyed  La  Salle's  ill-fated  colony  to  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  (1684).  See 
Thwaites,  Hennepin's  Neiv  Discovery  (Chicago,  1903),  pp.  388-392,  where  in  the 
original  text  of  the  reprint  (London,  1698)  it  is  misprinted  "  Toby."  —  Ed, 


336  Some  New  Voyages 

quarter  of  a  League  over :  Before  the  Port  there's  a  large, 
fine  road,  which  is  a  League  and  a  half  wide  ;  but  lies  fo 
bleak  to  the  North- Weft,  and  Weft-North- Weft  Winds,  the 
ftrongeft  and  moft  boifterous  Winds  that  are,  that  neither 
Cables  nor  Anchors,  nor  large  ftout  Ships  can  withftand 
their  furious  fhocks ;  tho'  indeed  thefe  violent  ftorms  feldom 
happen  but  in  the  latter  end  of  Autumn.  The  fame  year 
that  the  Pretty  was  loft,  the  King  loft  another  of  69  Guns 
call'd  the  Good,  in  this  Road ;  and  if  the  four  or  five  other 
Ships  that  belong'd  to  the  fame  Squadron,  had  not  took  the 
precaution  of  fteering  into  the  Port,  they  had  certainly  under- 
went the  fame  fate.  This  Road  then  which  is  only  expos'd 
to  the  North-Weft,  and  Weft-North-Weft  Winds,  has  fome 
hidden  Rocks  on  the  North  fide,  befides  thofe  at  Pointe 
Verte,  where  feveral  of  the  Inhabitants  are  wont  to  fifti.  All 
thefe  things  you  may  fee  plainly  upon  the  Plan  that  I  fent 
you  along  with  my  23^  Letter. 

[228]  Commonly,  there  comes  thirty  or  forty  Ships  from 
France  to  Placentia  every  year,  and  fometimes  fixty.  Some 
come  with  intent  to  fifh,  and  others  have  no  other  defign  than 
to  truck  with  the  Inhabitants,  who  live  in  the  Summer  time  on 
the  other  fide  of  the  Fort.  The  ground  upon  which  their 
Houfes  ftand,  is  call'd  La  grand  Grave,  for  in  efi^edl,  they  have 
nothing  but  Gravel  to  fpread  their  Cod-fifh  upon,  in  order  to 
have  'em  dry'd  by  the  Sun  after  they  are  faked.  The  Inhab- 
itants and  the  French  Fifliermen,  fend  their  Sloops  every  day 
two  Leagues  off  the  Port  to  purfue  the  Fifhery ;  and  fome- 


to  iV(?r^Z>- America.  337 

times  the  Sloops  return  fo  over-loaded,  that  they  are  in  a 
manner  bury'd  in  the  Water.  You  cannot  imagine  how  deep 
they  fink,  and  'tis  impoffible  you  fhould  believe  it,  unlefs  you 
faw  it.  The  Fifhery  commences  in  the  beginning  of  Jiine^  and 
is  at  an  end  about  the  middle  of  Auguft.  In  the  Harbour  they 
catch  a  little  fort  of  a  fifh,  which  they  put  upon  their  Hooks 
as  a  bait  for  the  Cod. 

Placentia  is  in  great  want  of  Gravel,  which  occafions  the 
thinnefs  of  the  Inhabitants.  If  the  Governours  prefer'd  the 
King's  Service  to  Avarice,  they  might  make  it  a  confiderable 
Poft,  and  a  great  many  would  make  gravel  Walks  at  their  own 
charge  ;  but  as  long  as  the  Governours  prey  upon  the  for- 
tunes of  private  Men,  under  the  fair  pretence  of  the  King's 
Service,  which  is  always  in  their  Mouths,  I  can't  fee  that  this 
Settlement  will  ever  be  inlarg'd  or  improv'd.  Do's  not  the 
Governour  difgrace  his  Prince,  and  fink  the  character  of  his 
Poft,  in  turning  Filherman,  Merchant,  Vintner,  and  adling  in 
the  way  of  a  thoufand  meaner  and  more  Mechanical  Trades? 
Is  not  this  a  piece  of  Tyranny?  To  force  the  Inhabitants  to 
buy  what  Goods  they  want,  out  of  fuch  and  fuch  a  Ship,  and 
to  fell  their  Cod  to  fuch  other  Ships  as  the  Governour  is 
interefs'd  in,  and  that  as  a  principal  Owner:  To  [229]  appro- 
priate to  himfelf  the  Rigging  and  Tackle  of  the  Ships  that 
are  caft  away  upon  the  Coaft,  to  ftop  the  Crew  of  Merchant- 
men for  his  own  Fifhery,  to  fell  Habitations  or  Settlements, 
to  ftifle  the  bidding  up  for  Effe6ls  fold  by  way  of  Audion 

that  he  may  ingrofs  them  by  his  fole  Authority,  to  change 
22 


33^  Some  New  Voyages 

the  Provifions  laid  up  in  Magazines  for  his  Majefty's  Troops, 
to  carry  off  the  good  Biskuit  and  put  bad  in  the  room  of  it, 
to  make  fo  much  Beef  and  Bacon  for  the  fubfiftance  of  the 
Garrifon,  to  force  the  Inhabitants  to  fend  their  Servants  and 
Carpenters  to  fome  work,  in  which  his  Majefty's  Service  is 
lefs  concern'd  than  his  own  Pocket :  Thefe,  I  fay,  are  things 
that  I  take  to  be  plain  infradlions  of  the  Orders  iffued  forth 
by  Lewis  the  XIV.  Thefe  are  abufes  that  muft  be  redrefs'd, 
if  we  would  have  the  King  to  be  well  ferv'd  :  And  yet  there's 
nothing  done  in  it.  For  my  part,  I  am  unacquainted  with 
the  reafon  of  the  delay;  thofe  that  have  a  mind  to  know,  had 
beft  ask  the  Deputies  of  Monfieur  de  P  *  *  *.  I  am  fully 
perfwaded,  that  all  thefe  Pyracies  do  not  come  to  the  King's 
Ear,  for  he's  too  juft  to  fuffer  'em. 

To  conclude ;  Placentia  bears  neither  Corn,  nor  Rie,  nor 
Peafe,  for  the  Soil  is  good  for  nothing ;  not  to  mention,  that 
if  it  were  as  good  and  as  fertile  as  any  in  Canada^  yet  no 
body  would  give  themfelves  the  trouble  to  cultivate  it;  for 
one  Man  earns  more  in  Cod-fifhing  in  one  Summer,  than  ten 
would  do  in  the  way  of  Agriculture.  In  the  great  Bay  of 
Placentia^  there  are  fome  little  Harbours,  (befides  that  of  the 
Fort)  which  the  Bifcay  Fiftiermen  refort  to.  Such  are  the 
little  and  the  great  Burin,  St.  Laurence,  Martir,  Chapeau 
Rouge,^  &c. 

^  The  inlets  here  mentioned  are  all  upon  the  western  coast  of  Placentia  Bay,  and 
still  retain  practically  their  old  names.  Burin  Inlet  has  at  its  entrance  an  island  of 
the  same  name.  "  Martir  "  is  the  present  Mortier  Bay,  being  thus  named  for  two 
well-known  cartographers  of  the  seventeenth  century,  Corneille  and  Pierre  Mortier. 
Burin  and  St.  Lawrence  were  early  seats  of  shipbuilding.  —  Ed, 


to  North' h.u\^nc2i. 


339 


[230]      A  Lift  of  the  Savage  Nations  of  Canada. 

Thofe  in  Acadia. 


The  Abenakis. 
The  Micmac. 
The  Canibas. 
The  Mahingans. 
The  Openangos. 
The  Soccokis. 
The  Etechemins. 


Thefe  are  all  of  'em  good  Warriours ; 
they  are  more  adlive  and  lefs  cruel  than 
the  Iroquefe.  Their  Language  differs  a 
little  from  that  of  the  Algonkins} 


The  Nations  that  lye  upon  the  River  of  St.  Laurence,  from  the  Sea 
to  Monreal. 


The  Papinachois. 

The  Mountaneers. 

The  Gafpefians. 

The  Hurons  of  Loreto,  the  Iroquefe  Tongue. 

The  Abenakis  of  Scilleri. 

The  Algonkins. 

The  Agnies  of  the  Fall  call'd  Saiit  St.  Louis;  they  fpeak  the 

Iroquefe  Language,  and  are  good  Warriours. 
The  Iroquefe  of  the  Mountain  of  Monreal;  they  fpeak  the 

Iroquefe  Language,  and  are  a  brave  People.^ 


Thefe  fpeak  the  Algonkin  Language. 


The  Algonkin  Language. 


1  For  these  tribes  see  pp.90,  327,  328,  a«^^.  The  Etechemins  —  nomads,  whom  the 
French  found  it  difficult  to  convert —  occupied  the  region  from  the  Penobscot  east  to 
beyond  St.  John  River,  and  in  1677  numbered  from  four  to  five  hundred.  The  rem- 
nants of  one  Etechemin  tribe  are  the  so-called  Quoddy  Indians  of  to-day.  — Ed. 

2  For  the  Papinachois,  see  p.  261,  note  2,  ante.  They  were  one  of  the  tribe  of 
the  Montagnais  (Mountaineers),  by  which  term  the  French  designated  the  wander- 


340  Some  New  Voyages 

Thofe  upon  the  Lake  of  Hurons. 

The  Hurons^  the  Iroquefe  Language. 

The  Outaouas. 

The  Nockes. 

The  Miffifagues.      \  '^^^  ^^^'''^'''  Language. 

The  Attikamek. 

The  Outehipoues,  alias  Saiiteurs,  good  Warriours.'^ 

ing  Algonquian  bands  north  of  the  St.  Lawrence,  among  whom  they  had  missions. 
As  the  name  indicates,  the  Gaspesiens  were  the  aborigines  of  Gaspe,  extending 

from  the  territory  of  the  Etechemins  northeast  to  the  St.  Lawrence.     In  1677  there 

were  from  four  to  five  hundred  of  these  savages,  whom  the  Jesuits  found  gentle  and 

tractable. 

The  other  tribes  mentioned  in  this  division  are  the  Indians  of  the  mission  colonies. 

For  Lorette,  see  p.  48,  note  i,ante;  for  Sillery,  p.  49,  note  i  ;  for  the  mission  of  Sault 

St.  Louis  to  the  Agnies  (Mohawks),  p.  56,  note  i  ;  for  that  of  La  Montagne,  p.  55, 

note  2.  —  Ed. 

^  The  Huron  confederacy  was  one  of  the  largest  and  most  enlightened  bodies  of 
North  American  Indians.  When  first  encountered  by  the  French  they  numbered 
about  16,000,  and  had  agricultural  villages  in  the  region  between  Lake  Simcoe  and 
Georgian  Bay —  see  p.  154,  note  2,  ante.  An  important  Jesuit  mission  was  founded 
in  the  Huron  country  (Huronia,  in  Jesuit  annals),  but  was  destroyed  and  the  Hurons 
dispersed  by  Iroquois  war-raids  (1648-49)  — see  Jesuit  Relations,  i,  pp.  21-27. 

Ottawa  (Outaouat)  was  the  name  applied  by  the  early  French  to  the  North- 
western Algonquians.  When  first  encountered,  they  dwelt  chiefly  upon  Manitoulin 
Island,  in  Lake  Huron,  whither  they  had  sought  an  asylum  from  the  Iroquois  —  see 
p.  153,  note  2,  ante.  Later,  their  chief  habitat  was  about  Mackinac.  They  were 
especially  faithful  to  French  interests,  and  Pontiac  was  an  Ottawa  chief.  The  rem- 
nants of  this  tribe  were  removed  to  Indian  Territory. 

For  the  Nockes  and  Mississagues,  see  p.  317,  note  i,  ante. 

The  Attikamek  (Attikamegues)  were  a  Montagnais  tribe  dwelling  chiefly  upon 
the  upper  St.  Maurice  River,  and  trading  with  the  Western  Indians.  They  were 
destroyed  by  the  ravages  of  the  Iroquois,  and  an  epidemic  of  small-pox. 

For  the  Saulteurs  (men  of  the  Sault),  by  which  term  the  French  designated  the 
entire  Chippewa  (Ojibwa)  nation,  whether  living  at  Sault  Ste.  Marie  or  elsewhere,  see 
p.  149,  note  I,  ante.  —  Ed. 


to  iVor^/6-America. 


341 


[231]     Upon  the  Ilinefe  Lake^  and  the  adjacent  Country. 


Some  Ilinefe  at  Cbegakou. 

The  Oitmamis,  good  Warriours. 

The  Maskoutens. 

The  Kikapous,  good  Warriours. 

The  Outagamis^  good  Warriours. 

The  Malomimis. 

The  Pouteouatamis. 

The  Ojatinons,  good  Warriours. 

The  iS«^/j. 


They  fpeak  the  Algon- 
kin  Language,  and  are  a 
fprightly  adtive  fort  of 
People.^ 


In  the  Neighbourhood  of  the  Lake  of  Frontenac. 


The  Tfonontouans. 

The  Goyoguans. 

The  Onnotagues. 

The  Onnoyoutes  and  Agnies^  at  a  fmall  diftance.^ 


Thefe   fpeak  a  different  Language 
from  the  Algonkin. 


1  For  the  Illinois  (Ilinese)  and  Miami"(Oumamis) ,  see  p.  77,  note  i,  ante.  The 
Ouiatonon  (Ojatinons)  were  a  Miami  tribe,  later  settled  in  western  Indiana,  and 
known  to  the  English  as  Weas. 

For  the  Mascouten  and  Kickapoo,  see  p.  174,  note  2  ;  for  the  Outagami  (Fox) 
and  Sauk  (Sakis),  p.  175,  note  2  ;  for  the  Menominee  (Malomimis)  and  Potawatonii 
(Pouteouatamis),  p.  168,  note  2.  These  dwelt  for  the  most  part  in  Wisconsin, 
which  was  more  densely  populated  with  aborigines  than  any  other  Northwestern 
state.  —  Ed. 

^ These  were  the  Iroquois,  for  whom  see  p.  58,  note  i,  ante.  —  Ed. 


;42 


Some  New  Voyages 


Near  the  River  of  the  Outaouas. 


The  Tabitibi. 
The  Monzoni. 
The  Machakandibi. 
The  Nopemen  d'Achirini. 
The  Nepifirini. 
The  Temiskamink. 


They  fpeak  t\iQ  Algonkin  Lan- 
guage, and  all  of  'em  are  very 
cowardly.^ 


To  the  North  of  Miffifipi,  and  upon  the  Confines  of  the  Upper 
Lake,  and  Hudfon's  Bay. 

The  Nadoueffis. 

The  Affimpouals. 

The  Sonkaskitons. 

The  Ouadbatons. 

The  Atintons. 

The   Cliftinos   brave  Warriour's 

and  adive  brisk  Men. 
The  Ekimaux. 


-  Thefe  fpeak  Algonkin.^ 


^The  Abittibi  (Tabitibi)  were  the  Indians  of  the  lake  and  river  of  that  name, 
tributary  of  the  Moose.  In  1760  the  French  maintained  a  post  upon  Abittibi  Lake. 
The  Monsoni  lived  in  the  eastern  part  of  Rupert  Land,  but  wandered  widely,  some 
of  that  nation  being  present  at  Sault  Ste.  Marie  when  St.  Lusson  took  possession  of 
the  Northwest  (1671). 

For  the  identification  of  Machakandibi,  see  p.  315,  note  i,  ante. 

The  Achirigouans  (Nopemen  d'Achirini)  and  Nipissing  (Nepisirini)  were 
kindred  tribes,  living  north  of  the  lake  named  for  the  latter.  Charlevoix  says  that 
they  were  the  original  Algonquians,  and  spoke  the  language  in  its  purity.  There 
are  now  about  two  hundred  of  the  tribe  on  their  reservation  on  Lake  Nipissing. 

The  Temiscaming  (Temiskamink)  Indians  took  their  name  from  that  of  the 
lake,  which  signified  "  deep."  About  two  hundred  still  frequent  the  agency  on  Lake 
Temiscaming  in  northern  Ontario.  —  Ed. 

^  Lahontan  is  mistaken  in  stating  that  these  tribes  spoke  the  Algonquian  language 


to  TVor^^-America.  343 

[232]    A  Lift  of  the  Animals  of  the  South  Countries  of  Canada. 

Wild  Beeves. 

Little  Stags  or  Harts. 

Roebucks  of  three  different  Species. 

Wolves,  fuch  as  we  have  in  Europe. 

Lynx's,  fuch  as  we  have  in  Europe. 

Michibichi,  a  fort  of  baftard  Tygre. 

Ferrets       )  .    ,  ,         .     ^ 

_^     .  .        >  fuch  as  we  have  in  Europe. 

Afli-colour'd  Squirrels. 

Hares.        )  ,    ,  ,         .     r- 

„  ,  ,  >  fuch  as  we  have  in  Europe. 

Rabbets,    f  ^ 

Badgers,  fuch  as  we  have  in  Europe. 

White  Beavers,  but  very  fcarce. 

Reddifh  Bears. 

Musk  Rats. 

Reddifh  Foxes,  as  in  Europe. 

Crocodiles  in  the  Miffiftpi. 

OJfa,  an  Animal  like  a  Hare,  upon  the  Miffiftpi. 


—  another  evidence  of  his  lack  of  knowledge  of  the  Siouan  country.  Of  all  the  tribes  enu- 
merated, the  Cristlnaux  (Clistini,  Cree)  were  the  only  members  of  that  stock,  although 
intimately  associated  with  the  Assinboin  (Assimpouals)  — see  p.  309,  note  i,  ante. 

With  the  exception  of  the  Eskimo  (Ekimaux),  the  other  tribes  are  all  Siouan 
(Dakotan)  — see  p.  175,  note  3,  ante.  The  Assiniboin  separated  from  the  Yankton 
tribe  of  Dakota,  moved  north  and  west,  and  are  still  one  of  the  strongest  bands  of 
the  Northwest.  The  Chonkasketons  (Sonkaskitons)  were  "people  of  the  fortified 
village";  the  Wahpetons  (Ouadebatons),  a  branch  of  the  Issati  (Santee);  the  Tetons 
(Atintons)  a  fierce  tribe  of  western  Sioux,  whose  later  habitat  was  the  Upper  Missouri 
River.  See  Thwaites  (ad.),  Orii^inal  Journals  of  Lc^tjis  and  Clark  Expedition 
(New  York,  1904),  index;  also  IVis.  Hist.  Colls.,  xvi,  pp.  193,  194. — Ed. 


344  Some  New  Voyages 

A  Lift  of  the  Animals  of  the  North  Countries  of  Canada. 
Orignals  or  Elks. 
Caribous  or  wild  Affes. 
Black  Foxes. 
Silver  colour'd  Foxes. 
A  fort  of  wild  Cats,  call'd  Enfans  du  Diable^  or  the  Devil's 

Children. 
Carcaious,  an  Animal  not  unlike  a  Badger. 
Porcupines. 

Fontereaux,  an  Amphibious  fort  of  little  Pole-Cats. 
Martins. 

Pole-Cats,  fuch  as  we  have  in  Europe. 
Black  Bears. 
[233]  White  Bears. 

Siffleurs,  an  Animal  that  makes  a  whizzing  noife. 
Flying  Squirrels. 
White  Hares. 
Beavers. 
Otters. 
Musk-Rats. 
Suiffe  Squirrels,  or  a  fort  of  Squirrels,  whofe  Hair  refembles  a 

Suijfe^s  Doublet. 
Great  Harts. 
Sea- Wolves  or  Calves. 


to  North- K-n\^v\c2i,  345 


A  Defcription  of  fuch  Animals  or  Beafls,  as  are  not  men- 
tioned in  the  Letters. 

THE  Michibichi  is  a  fort  of  Tyger,  only  'tis  The  Animals 
lefs  than  the  common  Tyger,  and  not  fo  °f  ^^'  ^'"^^ 
much  fpeckl'd.  As  foon  as  it  defcries  a  Man, 
it  runs  away,  and  climbs  up  the  firft  Tree  it  meets  with.  It 
attacks  all  brute  Animals  whatfoever,  and  conquers  'em  with 
eafe;  and,  which  is  very  fingular  and  peculiar  to  it  above  all 
other  Animals,  it  runs  in  to  the  afTiftance  of  the  Savages,  when 
they  purfue  Bears  and  wild  Beeves ;  upon  fuch  occafions  it 
makes  as  if  'twere  affraid  of  no  body,  and  fally's  out  with  fury 
upon  the  hunted  Animal.  The  Savages  call  thefe  Animals  a 
fort  of  ManitouSy  that  is,  Spirits  that  love  Men  ;  and  'tis  upon 
that  fcore  they  efteem  and  refped  'em  to  fuch  a  degree,  that 
they  would  choofe  rather  to  die,  than  to  kill  one  of  'em.^ 

The  white  Beavers  are  much  valued,  upon  the  account  of 
their  being  uncommon,  though  at  the  fame  time,  their  Hair  is 
neither  fo  large  nor  fo  fine  as  that  of  the  common  Beavers. 
As  there  are  but  few  of  thefe  white  Beavers,  fo  thofe  which 
are  quite  black  are  very  fcarce.^ 


^  The  animal  here  described  as  "Michibichi"  is  undoubtedly  the  puma  or 
American  tiger-cat  {Fetis  concolor) .  Marquette  describes  one  that  he  saw  swimming 
a  river,  and  one  of  the  Jesuit  missionaries  gives  this  title  to  a  manitou.  Consult 
Jesuit  Relations,  lix,  p.  109;  Ixvii,  pp.  159,  161.  —  Ed. 

2  The  white  beaver  is  an  albino  of  the  ordinary  Castor  canadensis,  and  is  very 


346  Some  New  Voyages 

[234]  The  Reddijh  Bears  are  mifchievous  Creatures,  for 
they  fall  fiercely  upon  the  Huntfmen,  whereas  the  black  ones 
fly  from  'em.  The  former  fort  are  lefs,  and  more  nimble 
than  the  latter.^ 

The  Crocodiles  of  Mijfifipi^  are  exadlly  the  fame  with  thofe 
of  the  Nile  and  other  places.  I  have  feen  that  Crocodile  that 
is  at  EngoUJma  in  Aquitaine^  and  find  that  it  has  the  fame  figure 
with  thefe,  only  'tis  fomewhat  lefs.  The  moft  ufual  method 
that  the  Savages  have  for  taking  'em  alive,  is  to  throw  great 
Wreaths  or  Cords  made  of  the  barks  of  Trees  with  a  running 
knot,  upon  their  Neck,  the  middle  of  their  Body,  their  Paws, 
6fc.  After  they  are  thus  fiez'd,  they  fhut  'em  up  between  ten 
or  twelve  Stakes,  and  there  tie  'em  after  their  Belly  is  turn'd 
upwards.  While  they  lie  in  this  pofture,  they  flea  'em  without 
touching  their  Head  or  their  Tail,  and  give  'em  a  Coat  of 
Fir-bark,  to  which  they  fet  fire,  having  cut  the  Ropes  that 
keep'd  'em  faft.  Upon  fuch  occafions,  thefe  Animals  make  a 
fearful  houling  and  crying.  To  conclude,  the  Savages  are 
frequently  fwallow'd  up  by  thefe  Creatures,  whether  in 
fwlmming  over  a  River,  or  in  fleeping  upon  its  Banks.  Ariofte 
in  the  68  Diapafon  of  his  i^th  Song,  gives  this  Defcription  of 
a  Crocodile. 

Vive  fub  lito  e  dentro  a  la  Riviera, 
Ei  Corpi  Umani  fon  le  fue  Vivande, 
De  le  Perfone  mifere  e  incaute, 
Di  Viandanti  e  d'infelice  naute. 


rare.     The  black  beaver  is  less  unusual,  but  only  about  one  in  ten  thousand  is  found 
of  this  color.     See  Martin,  Castorologia,  p,  39.  —  Ed. 

1  It  is  still  a  question  among  naturalists  whether  the  cinnamon  bear  and  the  ordi- 


to  N orth' A.m^nc3.,  347 

That  is,  it  lives  both  in  the  River,  and  upon  its  Banks ; 
it  fquafhes  People  with  its  murdering  Tooth ;  it  feeds  upon 
the  Bodies  of  poor  Travellers,  of  unfortunate  Paffengers,  and 
Sailours.^ 

The  OJfa^  are  little  Animals  like  Hares,  and  refemble  'em 
in  every  thing,  excepting  the  Ears  and  Hind-feet.  They  run, 
and  cannot  climb.  Their  [235]  Females  have  a  Bag  under 
their  Belly,  where  their  young  ones  enter  upon  a  purfuit,  in 
order  to  fave  themfelves  along  with  the  Mother,  who  immedi- 
ately betakes  her  felf  to  flight. ^ 

The  Silver-colour'd  Foxes  are  of  the  fame  y^^  Animals 
fhape  with  thofe  of  Europe^  as  well  as  the  black  or  Beajls  of  the 
ones.  The  black  ones  are  very  fcarce,  and  who-  North  Coun- 
foever  catches  one,  is  fure  to  fell  it  for  its  weight  *^'"' 
in  Gold.  This  fpecies  is  met  with  only  in  the  coldeft  Coun- 
tries. 

The  White  Bears  are  a  monftrous  Animal,  and  extraordi- 
nary long  ;  their  Head  has  a  formidable  Afpedt,  and  their 
Hair  is  very  large  and  thick  ;  they  are  fo  fierce,  that  they'll 
come  and  attack  a  Sloop  in  the  Sea,  with  feven  or  eight  Men 
in  it.  'Tis  faid,  that  they'll  fwim  fix  or  feven  Leagues  without 
being  tyr'd.     They  live  upon  Fifh  and  Shells  upon  the  Sea- 


nary  black  bear  {Ursus  americanus)  are  two  species  or  one.  Huntsmen,  however, 
usually  discriminate,  as  Lahontan  does.  —  Ed. 

^  It  is  possible  that  Lahontan  received  his  description  of  the  crocodile  {Alligator 
mississippiensis)  from  some  members  of  La  Salle's  ill-fated  colony,  whose  survivors  he 
met  at  Mackinac.     See  p.  145,  ante.  —  Ed. 

2  The  ordinary  opossum  of  North  America  {Didelphys  virginiatta) .  — Ed. 


348  Some  New  Voyages 

fhoar,  from  whence  they  feldom  ftraggle  far.  I  never  faw  but 
one  of  'em  in  my  Life-time,  which  had  certainly  tore  me  to 
pieces,  if  I  had  not  fpy'd  it  at  a  diflance,  and  fo  had  time  to 
run  back  for  fhelter  to  Fort  Louis  at  Placentia} 

The  Flying  Squirrels  are  as  big  as  a  large  Rat,  and  of  a 
greyifh  white  colour.  They  are  as  droufie,  as  thofe  of  the 
other  Species  are  watchful.  They  are  call'd  Flying  Squirrels^ 
in  regard  that  they  fly  from  one  Tree  to  another,  by  the 
means  of  a  certain  Skin  which  flretches  it  felf  out  in  the  form 
of  a  Wing,  when  they  make  thefe  little  Flights. 

The  White  Hares  are  only  fuch  in  Winter,  for  as  foon  as 
the  Spring  comes  on,  they  begin  to  turn  grayifh,  and  by 
degrees  recover  the  fame  colour  as  our  Hares  have  in  France^ 
which  they  hold  till  the  end  of  Autumn. 

The  Stuiffe  Squirrels  are  little  Animals,  refembling  little 
Rats.2  The  Epithet  of  Suijfe  is  beftow'd  upon  'em,  in  regard 
that  the  Hair  which  covers  their  Body,  [236]  is  flreak'd  with 
black  and  white,  and  refembles  a  Sniffers  Doublet ;  and  that 
thefe  ftreaks  make  a  ring  on  each  Thigh,  which  bears  a  great 
deal  of  refemblance  to  a  Sniffers  Cap. 

The  large  Stags  are  neither  higher  nor  thicker,  than  thofe 
we  have  in  Europe;  but  they  are  call'd  large  in  proportion 


1  Lahontan  must  refer  here  to  the  polar  bear  {Thallassartos  maritimus) ,  which 
occasionally  ventures  as  far  as  the  southern  coast  of  Newfoundland.  —  Ed. 

2  The  well-known  flying  squirrel  {Sciuropterus  volucella)  is  well  described. 
Several  of  the  North  American  hares  change  color  as  thus  noted  ;  probably  Lahontan 
meansLepustimidus,'var.  arcticus.  The  Swiss  squirrel  is  either  a  chipmunk  [Tamias 
striatus)  or  a  ground-squirrel  {Spermophile  tridecemlineatus) .  See  Jesuit  Relations, 
vi,  p.  315.  —  Ed. 


to  North- Pixn^nc^i,  349 

to  two  other  Species  of  Harts  that  frequent  the  Southern 
Countries.     The  leffer  fort  affords  the  moft  delicious  Meat. 

The  Sea-JVolveSy  which  fome  call  Sea-Calves^  are  as  big  as 
Maftiffs.  They  are  almoft  always  in  the  Water,  or  at  leaft 
they  never  go  far  from  the  Sea  fide.  Thefe  Animals  do  not 
walk  fo  much  as  they  crawl,  for  when  they  raife  themfelves 
out  of  the  Water,  they  only  creep  upon  the  Sand  or  Clay. 
Their  Head  has  the  form  of  an  Otter's  Head,  and  their  Feet, 
which  have  no  Legs,  refemble  thofe  of  a  Goofe.  The  Female 
kind  bring  forth  their  young  ones  upon  the  Rocks,  or  upon 
fome  little  Iflands,  juft  by  the  Sea.  The  Sea-Wolves  live 
upon  Fifh,  and  refort  to  cold  Countries.  There's  a  pro- 
digious number  of  'em  about  the  Mouth  of  the  River  of 
St.  Laurence} 

As  for  the  remaining  Animals  of  Canada^  I  gave  you  an 
account  of  'em  in  my  Letters.  I  will  not  offer  to  fhew  you 
what  methods  the  Savages  take  to  catch  or  kill  all  thefe  Ani- 
mals, for  fuch  an  undertaking  would  be  endlefs.  This  I  can 
affure  you  of  in  the  general,  that  they  rarely  go  a  Hunting  to 
no  purpofe,  and  that  they  make  no  ufe  of  their  Dogs,  but  in 
the  Hunting  of  Elks,  and  fometimes  in  Hunting  of  Beavers, 
as  you  fhall  fee  under  the  Head  of  the  Diverfions  of  Hunting 
and  Shooting  among  the  Savages. 


^The  ordinary  seal  {Phoca  vitulina),  often  called  sea-calf,  from  the  sound  it 
emits.  —  Ed. 


350  Some  New  Voyages 


[237]  A  Lift  of  the  Fowl  or  Birds  that  frequent  the  South  Countries 
of  Canada. 

Vultures. 

Huards,  a  River-fowl  as  big  as  a  Goofe. 

Swans.  ^ 

Black,  Geefe.      I 

Black  Ducks.     \    fuch  as  we  have  in  Europe. 

Plungeons. 

Coots.  J 

Rayles. 

Turkeys. 

Red  Partridges. 

Pheafants. 

Large  Eagles. 

Cranes.  ~j 

Blackbirds.    >  fuch  as  we  have  in  Europe. 

Thrufhes.      J 

Wood-Pigeons. 

Parrots. 

Ravens.      ^   ,     ,  ,  •      7- 

\  fuch  as  we  have  in  hurope. 
Swallows.  ) 

Several  forts  of  Birds  of  Prey  that  are  not  known  in  Europe. 

Nightingales  unknown  in  Europe^  as  well  as  feveral  other  little 
Birds  of  different  colours,  particularly  that  call'd  Oifeau 
Mouche,  a  very  little  Bird  refembling  a  Fly;  and  great 
quantities  of  Pelicans. 


to  iVor/y6-America. 


351 


fuch  as  we  have  in  Europe. 


The  Birds  of  the  North  Countries  of  Canada. 
Buftards. 
White  Geefe. 

Ducks  of  ten  or  twelve  forts. 
Teals. 
Sea-Mews. 
Grelans. 
Sterlets. 

[238]  Sea-Parrots. 
Moyacks. 
Cormorants. 
Heath-Cocks. 
Snipes. 
Plungeons. 
Plovers. 
Lapwings. 
Herns. 
Courbeious. 
The    Water -Fowl 
call'd  Chevalier. 
Beateurs  de  Faux,  a  Fowl  as  big  as  a  Quail. 
White  Partridges. 
Large  black  Partridges. 
Reddifh  Partridges. 
Woodhens. 
Turtledoves. 


fuch  as  we  have  in  Europe. 


352  Some  New  Voyages 

White  Ortolans,  a  Bird  no  bigger  than  a  Lark. 

Sterlings.  )   ,    ,  ,         .     r? 

°     [  luch  as  we  have  in  hurope. 
Ravens.     ) 

Vultures. 

Spar-Hawks.  "| 

Merlins.  j^  like  ours  in  Europe. 

Swallows.        J 

Bees  De  fete,  a  fort  of  a  Duck. 

A  Table  of  the  Inse5ts  that  are  found  in  Canada. 
Adders. 
Afps. 

Rattle-Snakes. 
Lowing  Frogs. 
Gnats  or  Midges. 
Gad-Bees. 
Brulots  or  burning  Handworms. 


to  iVor^/6" America.  353 


[239]  A  Defcription  of  fuch  Birds  as  are  not  accounted  for 
in  my  Letters. 

THE  Htiards  are  a  Frefhwater-Fowl,  as  big     The  Fowl  or 
as  a  Goofe,  and  as  dull  and  heavy  as  an     Birds  of  the 

Afs.     They  have  black  and  white  Feathers,  a 

^  '         trtes. 

pointed  Beak,  and  a  very  fhort  Neck.  They 
only  duck  or  dive  in  the  Summer,  for  they  cannot  ufe  their 
Wings  ;  and  in  that  Seafon,  the  Savages  take  the  Diverfion 
of  furrounding  'em  with  feven  or  eight  Canows,  difpers'd 
here  and  there,  and  fo  obliging  'em  to  dive  down,  when  they 
offer  to  come  up  to  take  breath.  The  Savages  have  Entertain'd 
me  feveral  times  with  this  agreeable  Amufement,  during  the 
courfe  of  the  Voyages  I  made  with  them. 

The  Red  Partridges  are  wild  and  little,  and  much  different 
from  the  Red  Partridge  we  have  in  Europe,  as  well  as  the  Pheaf- 
ant,  whofe  Feathers  being  of  a  white  colour  with  black  fpecks, 
make  a  very  agreeable  diverfity.^ 

The  largeft  Eagles  we  find  in  this  Country,  are  no  bigger 
than  Swans.  Their  Head  and  their  Tail  is  white,  and  they 
have  frequent  Ingagements  with  a  fort  of  Vultures,  that  com- 
monly have  the  better  of  it.     In  our  Voyages  we  had  frequent 


^  There  are  no  true  partridges  In  America  ;  those  so  called  are  quail  or  grouse. 
This  was  probably  Ortyx  <virginianus,  our  ordinary  "bob  white,"  which  formerly 
was  common  in  Canada.  — Ed. 
28 


354  Some  New  Voyages 

occafions  of  feeing  thefe  Ingagements,  which  laft  as  long  as 
the  Eagle  can  keep  up  the  force  of  its  Wings. 

The  Parrots  are  met  with  in  the  Ilinefe  Country,  and  upon 
the  River  of  Mijfifipi.  They  are  very  fmall,  and  are  the  fame 
with  thofe  that  we  bring  from  Brazil  and  Cayenne} 

That  fort  of  Nightingale  that  I  faw,  is  of  a  peculiar  form ; 
for  'tis  of  a  leffer  fize  than  the  European^  and  of  a  blewifli 
colour,  and  its  notes  are  more  diverfified ;  befides  that,  it 
lodges  in  the  holes  of  Trees,  and  four  or  five  of  'em  do  com- 
monly keep  [240]  together  upon  the  thickeft  Trees,  and  with 
joynt  Notes  Warble  o'er  their  Songs. 

The  Flylike  Bird  is  no  bigger  than  one's  Thumb,  and  the 
colour  of  its  Feathers  is  fo  changeable,  that  'tis  hard  to  faften 
any  one  colour  upon  it.  They  appear  fometimes  red,  fome- 
times  of  a  Gold  colour,  at  other  times  they  are  blew  and  red  ; 
and  properly  fpeaking,  'tis  only  the  brightnefs  of  the  Sun  that 
makes  us  unfenfible  of  the  change  of  its  gold  and  red  colours. 
Its  beak  is  as  (harp  as  a  Needle.  It  flies  from  Flower  to 
Flower,  like  a  Bee,  and  by  its  fluttering  fucks  the  flowery  Sap. 
Sometimes  about  Noon  it  pearches  upon  the  little  branches  of 
Plum-trees  or  Cherry-trees.  I  have  fent  fome  of  'em  dead  to 
France^  it  being  impoflible  to  keep  'em  alive,  and  they  were 
look'd  upon  as  a  great  Curiofity.^ 

There  are  ten  or  twelve  forts  of  Ducks  in  this  Country. 


1  All  the  early  travellers  speak  of  paroquets  in  the  Ohio  valley.  They  were  the 
Carolina  parakeets  (C'o««rMJ  carolinensis) ,  now  restricted  to  Florida  and  some  South- 
western States.  —  Ed. 

2  The  humming  bird  is  peculiar  to  America  ;  the  ordinary  variety  in  the  Eastern 
States  and  Canada  is  the  ruby-throat  {Trochilus  colubris).  — Ed. 


to  North-An\tx\C3.,  355 

Thofe  call'd  Branchus,  are  the  smalleft  indeed,  but  they  are 
much  the  prettyeft.  The  Feathers  upon  their  Neck  ^^^  ^-^^^ 
looks  fo  bright,  by  vertue  of  the  variety  and  liveli-  of  the 
nefs  of  their  colours,  that  a  Fur  of  that  nature  Northern 
would  be  invaluable  in  Mufcovy  or  Turky.  They  ^''""^^'^^• 
owe  the  name  of  Branchus^  to  their  refting  upon  the  branches 
of  Trees.  There's  another  Species  of  Ducks  in  this  Country, 
that  are  as  black  as  Jackdaws,  only  their  Beak  and  the  circle 
of  their  Eyes  are  red. 

The  SeamewSy  Grelans  and  Sterlets^  are  Fowls  that  fly  incef- 
fantly  over  Seas,  Lakes,  and  Rivers,  in  order  to  catch  little  Fifh. 
Their  Flefh  is  good  for  nothing,  befides  that,  they  have  no 
fubilance  of  Body,  though  they  feem  to  be  as  big  as  Pigeons. 

The  Sea-Parrots  bear  the  name  of  Parrots,  upon  the  account 
that  their  Beak  is  of  the  fame  form  with  that  of  the  Land 
Parrot.  They  never  quit  the  Sea  or  the  Shoar ;  and  are  always 
flying  upon  the  furface  of  the  Water,  in  queft  of  little  Fifli. 
Their  [241]  colour  is  black,  and  their  fize  is  much  the  fame 
with  that  of  a  Pullet.  There  are  great  numbers  of  'em  upon 
the  bank  of  Newfound-Land,  and  near  the  Coaft  of  the  Ifland, 
which  the  Seamen  catch  with  Hooks  cover'd  with  a  Cod's 
Roe,  and  hung  over  the  Prow  of  the  Ship. 

The  Moyacks  are  a  fort  of  Fowl,  as  big  as  a  Goofe,  having 
a  fliort  Neck,  and  a  broad  Foot ;  and  which  is  very  fl:range, 
their  Eggs  are  half  as  big  again  as  a  Swan's,  and  yet  they  are 
all  Yelk,  and  that  fo  thick,  that  they  muft  be  diluted  with 
Water,  before  they  can  be  us'd  in  Pancakes. 

The  White  Partridges,  are  as   big  as  our  red  Partridges. 


356  Some  New  Voyages 

Their  Feet  are  cover'd  with  fuch  a  thick  down,  that  they 
refemble  thofe  of  a  young  Rabbet.  They  are  only  feen  in  the 
Winter  time,  and  fome  years  they  are  fcarce  feen  at  all,  though 
on  the  other  hand,  in  other  years  they  are  fo  plentiful,  that 
you  may  buy  a  dozen  for  Nine  pence.  This  is  the  moft 
fbupid  Animal  in  the  World  ;  it  fits  upon  the  Snow,  and  fuffers 
it  felf  to  be  knock'd  on  the  head  with  a  pole  without  offering 
to  ftir.  I  am  of  the  opinion,  that  this  unaccountable  numb- 
nefs  is  occafion'd  by  its  long  flight  from  Greenland  to  Canada. 
This  conjedure  is  not  altogether  groundlefs,  for  'tis  obferv'd, 
that  they  never  come  in  flocks  to  Canada^  but  after  the  long 
continuance  of  a  North  or  a  North-Eafl:  Wind. 

The  Black  Partridges  are  truly  very  pretty.  They  are 
bigger  than  ours ;  and  their  beak  together  with  the  circle  of 
the  Eyes,  and  the  Feet  are  red  ;  their  plumage  being  of  a 
fhining  black  colour.  Thefe  Animals  are  very  proud,  and 
feem  to  have  a  fenfe  of  their  beauty  as  they  walk.  They  are 
but  very  uncommon,  as  well  as  the  reddifh  Partridges^  which 
refemble  Quails  in  their  bulk  and  brisknefs. 

The  White  Ortolans  are  only  met  with  in  Winter ;  but  I  am 
of  the  opinion,  that  their  Feathers  are  naturally  [242]  of  a 
white  colour,  and  that  they  retrieve  their  natural  colour  in  the 
places  they  retire  to,  when  they  difappear  in  Canada.  They 
are  indifferent  good  to  eat  when  they  are  fat,  but  that  they 
feldom  are.  In  the  Winter  great  quantities  of  'em  are  catch'd 
about  the  Barns,  with  Nets  fl;retch'd  out  upon  the  Straw.^ 


^  For  the  birds  of  Canada,  see  Macoun,  Catalogue  of  Canadian  Birds  (Ottawa, 
1900-03).  —  Ed. 


to  iVo/Y/6- America.  357 


A  Defcription  of  the  InfeSls  of  Canada. 

THE  Adders  of  Canada  do  no  harm  at  all.  The  Afps 
indeed  are  very  dangerous,  when  the  People  bathe  in 
the  ftagnating  Water  towards  the  South  Countries.  The 
Rattle-Snake  or  Sounding  Serpent  is  fo  call'd,  in  regard  that  at 
the  extremity  of  its  Tail,  it  has  a  fort  of  a  Cafe,  containing 
certain  bones  which  make  fuch  a  noife  when  the  Serpent 
creeps  along,  that  'tis  heard  thirty  Paces  oflf.  Thefe  Serpents 
betake  themfelves  to  flight  when  they  hear  the  found  of  Mens 
Feet,  and  commonly  fleep  in  the  Sun  either  in  green  Fields,  or 
open  Woods.    They  never  fting  but  when  they  are  trod  upon.^ 

The  Lowing  Frogs  are  fo  call'd  with  refpedt  to  their  croak- 
ing, which  founds  like  the  lowing  of  an  Oxe.  Thefe  Frogs 
are  twice  as  large  as  thofe  we  have  in  Europe.  The  Canada 
Gad-Bees  are  a  fort  of  Flies  about  twice  as  big  as  Bees  ;  but  of 
the  fame  form  with  a  common  Fly.  They  fling  only  between 
Noon,  and  three  a  Clock  in  the  Afternoon ;  but  then  they  do 
it  fo  violently,  that  they  fetch  Blood.  However,  'tis  only 
upon  certain  Rivers  that  they  are  met  with. 

The  Brulots  are  a  fort  of  Hand-worms,  which  cleave  fo 
hard  to  the  Skin,  that  their  pricking  occafions  the  fame  fenfe, 


^  Bain  says  (Alexander  Henry,  p.  i68,  note  2)  that  there  is  no  true  rattlesnake 
{Crotalus  horridus)  in  Canada  ;  the  variety  found  there  is  the  Caudisona  tirgue- 
tnina.  —  Ed. 


35^  Some  New  Voyages 

as  if  'twere  a  burning  Coal,  or  a  fpark  of  Fire.  Thefe  little 
Animals  are  unperceivable,  though  at  the  fame  time  they  are 
pretty  numerous. 

[243]   The  Names  of  the  Fifli  in  the  River  of  St.  Laurence,  from 
its  Mouth  to  the  Lakes  of  Canada. 

Balenots  or  little  Whales. 

A  Fifh  almoft  as  big  as  a  Whale,  call'd  Souffleur. 

White  Porpoifes. 

Salmon,  fuch  as  we  have  in  Europe. 

Eels. 

Maycrel,  as  in  Europe. 

Herrings. 

Gafperots,  a  fmall  Fifh  like  a  Herring. 

Bafes. 

Shad-fiih. 

Cod-fi{h. 

Plaices. 

Smelts. 

Turbots. 

Pikes. 

The  Gold-colour'd  Fiih. 

Roaches. 

Lampreys, 

Merles  or  Sea-Tench. 

Thornbacks. 

Cungars. 

Sea-Cows,  a  kind  of  Porpoifes. 


to  North- h.mmc2i,  359 

The  Shell-Fijh. 
Little  Lobfters. 

Crab-fifh. 

Cockles. 

Mufcles. 

The  Fifli  that  are  found  in  the  Lakes  0/ Canada,  and  in  the  Rivers 
that  fall  into  Vw. 

Sturgeons. 

The  Armed  Fiih. 

[244]  Trouts, 

White-Fifh. 

A  fort  of  Herrings. 

Eels. 

Mullets 

Carp. 

Gull-Fifh. 

Gudgeons. 

The  Fifh  found  in  the  River  of  MifTifipi. 

Pikes,  fuch  as  we  have  in  Europe. 

Carps. 

Tench. 

Perches. 

Dabs,  and  feveral  others  that  are  not  known  in  Europe. 


360  Some  New  Voyages 


A  Defcription  of  the  Fifli  that  are  not  mention' d  in  the 
Letters. 

Thofe  between  rx^HE  Balenot  is  a  fort  of  a  Whale,  only  'tis 
the  Mouth  of  j_  lefs  and  more  flefhy,  and  does  not  yield  Oil 
the  River,  and  j^  proportion  to  the  Northern  Whales.  This 
the  Lakes.  _,_  ..  r         t  1      t-*- 

Filh  goes  fifty  or  lixty  Leagues  up  the  Kiver. 

The  Souffleurs  are  much  of  the  fame  fize,  only  they  are 
fliorter  and  blacker.  When  they  mean  to  take  breath  after 
diving,  they  fquirt  out  the  Water  through  a  hole  behind  their 
Head,  after  the  fame  manner  with  the  Whales.  Commonly, 
they  dog  the  Ships  in  the  River  of  St.  Laurence. 

The  White  Porpoifes  are  as  big  as  Oxen.  They  always  go 
along  with  the  Current;  and  go  up  with  the  tide  till  they 
come  at  frefh  Water,  upon  which  they  retire  with  the  ebb 
Water.  They  are  a  ghaftly  fort  of  Animals,  and  are  fre- 
quently taken  before  Quebec. 

[245]  The  Gafperots  are  a  fmall  Fifh,  not  unhke  a  Herring. 
In  the  Summer  time  they  make  in  to  the  fhoar  in  fuch  fhoals, 
that  the  Cod-fifhers  take  as  many  of  'em  as  ferves  for  Bait  for 
that  Fifhery.  Thefe  Fifhermen  do  likewife  make  ufe  of  Her- 
rings, when  the  feafon  obliges  them  to  put  into  the  fhoar  to 
Spawn.     In  a  word,  all  the  Fifh  that  are  made  ufe  of  for  a  Bait 


to  iVor^^- America.  361 

to  make  the  Codfifh  bite  at  the  Hook,  are  call'd  Boete  in  the 
Fifhermens  Dialedt. 

The  Gold-coloured  Fish  are  nice  Food.  They  are  about 
fifteen  Inches  long ;  their  Scales  are  yellow,  and  they  are 
valued  very  high. 

The  Sea-Cows^  which  are  a  fort  of  Porpoifes,  are  bigger 
than  the  Normandy  Beeves.  They  have  a  fort  of  Paws  cut  like 
a  Goofe's  Foot,  their  Head  refembles  that  of  an  Otter ;  and 
their  Teeth,  which  are  two  Inches  thick,  and  nine  Inches  long, 
are  reckon'd  the  fineft  Ivory  that  is.  'Tis  faid  that  they  range 
wide  of  the  (hoar,  towards  Sandy  and  Marfhy  places. 

The  Lobfters  of  this  River  feem  to  be  exadtly  the  fame  with 
thofe  we  have  in  Europe. 

The  Cockles  are  of  a  piece,  with  thofe  we  have  upon  the 
coaft  of  France,  excepting  that  they  are  larger,  and  have  a  more 
agreeable  tafte,  though  their  Flefh  feems  to  partake  more  of 
crudity  and  indigeftion. 

The  Mufcles  of  this  River  are  prodigious  large,  and  tafte 
very  well;  but  'tis  next  to  an  impoflibility  to  eat  'em  with- 
out breaking  one's  Teeth,  by  reafon  of  their  being  ftuff'd 
with  Pearl;  I  call  it  Pearl,  tho'  the  name  of  Gravel  or  Sand 
may  be  more  proper,  with  refpedl  to  its  value,  for  I  brought 
to  Paris  fifty  or  fixty  of  the  largeft  and  fineft,  which  were 
rated  only  at  a  penny  a  piece ;  notwithftanding  that  we 
had  broke  above  two  thoufand  Mufcles  to  make  up  that 
number. 

[246]  The  Lake-Sturgeons  are  commonly  five  or  fix  Foot 


362  Some  New  Voyages 

long :  But  I  once  faw  one  of  ten  Foot,  and  another  of  twelve 
in  length.  The  Savages  catch  'em  with  Nets  in  the  Winter, 
and  Grapples  in  the  Summer.  'Tis  faid,  they  have  a  certain 
fort  of  Flefh  about  their  Head,  that  tafts  like  Beef,  Mutton, 
and  Veal ;  but  I  have  eat  of  it  feveral  times,  and  never  could 
obferve  any  fuch  thing,  which  makes  me  look  upon  the  alle- 
gation as  chimerical. 

The  Fifh  in  Armour^  is  about  three  Foot  and  a  half  long. 
'Tis  defended  by  fuch  ftrong  and  hard  Scales,  that  'tis 
impoflible  for  any  other  Fifh  to  hurt  it.  Its  Enemies  are 
Trouts  and  Roaches,  but  'tis  admirably  well  provided  for  the 
repulfing  of  their  Attacks,  by  vertue  of  its  pointed  Snout, 
which  is  a  Foot  long,  and  as  hard  as  its  Skin.  It  eats  very 
well,  and  its  Flefh  or  Subftance  is  as  firm  as  'tis  white. 

The  Lake  Dabs  or  Sandings  are  not  above  a  Foot  long,  but 
they  are  very  thick  all  over.  They  are  call'd  Barbues  in 
French^  with  allufion  to  a  certain  fort  of  Beards  that  hang 
down  from  the  fide  of  their  Muzzle,  and  are  as  big  as  ears  of 
Corn.  Thofe  which  we  find  in  the  River  of  Mijfifipi^  are  of 
a  monftrous  fize.  Both  the  one  and  the  other  are  catch'd 
with  a  Hook,  as  well  as  with  a  Net;  and  make  very  good 
Victuals. 

The  MiJJifipi  Carps  are  likewife  of  an  extraordina-ry  fize, 
and  admirably  well  tafted.  They  are  of  the  fame  form  with 
ours.  In  the  Autumn  they  put  in  towards  the  flioar,  and  are 
eafily  catch'd  with  a  Net. 

The  largeft  Trouts  we  meet  with  in  the  Lakes,  are  five  Foot 


to  North-hmtnc2i.  363 

and  a  half  long,  and  of  one  Foot  Diameter.  Their  flefh  is 
red,  and  they  are  catch'd  with  great  Hooks  made  faft  to 
pieces  of  Wire. 

The  Fifh  catch'd  in  the  Lakes,  are  better  than  thofe  we 
take  at  Sea,  or  in  the  Rivers,  particularly  [247]  the  white  Fifh, 
which  for  goodnefs  and  nice  Eating,  are  far  beyond  all  the 
other  Species.  The  Savages  that  live  upon  the  fides  of  thofe 
little  frefh-water  Seas,  prefer  the  Broth  of  Fifh,  to  Meat- 
broth,  when  they  are  indifpos'd.  This  choice  they  ground 
upon  experience ;  whereas  the  French  on  the  other  hand  find 
that  Venifon  Broth  is  at  once  more  fubftantial  and  reftora- 
tive. 

The  Rivers  of  Canada  are  replenifh'd  with  an  infinity  of 
other  fifhes,  that  are  not  known  in  Europe.  The  Filh  catch'd 
in  the  North-Country  Rivers,  are  different  from  thofe  of  the 
South ;  and  thofe  taken  in  the  Long  River,  which  difimbogues 
into  the  River  of  Mijfifipi,  favour  fo  rank  of  Mud  and  Clay, 
that  'tis  impoflible  to  eat  of  'em ;  abating  for  a  fort  of  little 
Trouts  that  the  Savages  take  in  the  adjacent  Lakes,  which 
make  a  tolerable  Mefs. 

The  Rivers  of  the  Otentats,  and  the  Miffouris,  produce  fuch 
odd  fhap'd  filhes,  that  'tis  impoffible  to  defcribe  'em  without 
they  were  drawn  upon  Paper.  Thefe  Fifhes  tafts  but  forrily, 
and  yet  the  Savages  love  it  mightily,  which  I  take  to  proceed 
from  their  knowing  no  better. 


364  Some  New  Voyages 

The  Trees  and  Fruits  of  the  South  Countries  of  Canada. 
Beech-Trees. 


\  fuch  as  we  have  in  Europe. 
J.  J 


^    ,  ^  ,  ,  fuch  as  we  have  in  Europe. 

Red  Oak.        J  ^ 

Bitter  Cherry-trees. 

Maple-trees. 

Afh-trees. 

Elms. 

Linden-trees. 

Nut-trees  of  two  forts. 

Chefnut-trees. 

Apple-trees. 

[248]  Pear-trees. 

Plum-trees. 

Cherry-trees. 

Hazel-trees,  fuch  as  we  have  in  Europe 

Vines. 

A  fort  of  Citrons. 

Water  Melons. 

Sweet  Citruls. 

Wild  Goofeberries. 

Pine-apples. 

Tobacco,  fuch  as  our  Spani/h  Tobacco. 

The  Trees  and  Fruits  of  the  North  Countries  of  Canada. 
White  Oak. 
Red  Oak. 
Birch-trees. 


to  North-h.mQnc2i.  365 


Bitter  Cherry-trees. 

M  apple-trees. 

Pine-trees. 

Epinettes. 

Fir-trees  of  three  forts. 

Peruffes. 

Cedar-trees. 

Afpin-trees. 

White  Wood. 

Alder-trees. 

Maiden  Hair. 

Strawberries. 

Rasberries. 

Goofeberries. 

Bluets. 


366  Some  New  Voyages 


A  Defcription  of  the  above-mention' d  Trees  and  Fruits. 

YOU  muft  remark,  that  all  the  Wood  of  Canada  is  good  of 
its  kind.  The  Trees  that  ftand  expos'd  to  the  North- 
Winds  are  apt  [249]  to  be  influenc'd  by  the  Frost,  as  it 
appears  from  the  chops  and  chinks  that  it  occafions. 

The  Bitter  Cherry-tree^  has  a  hard  and  whitifh  Wood,  with 
a  grey  Bark.  Some  of  'em  are  as  tall  as  the  loftyeft  Oaks,  and 
as  big  as  a  Hogfhead.  This  Tree  grows  ftreight ;  it  has  an 
oval  Leaf,  and  is  made  ufe  of  in  Beams,  Rafters,  and  other 
Carpenter's  work. 

The  M apple-tree  is  much  of  the  fame  height  and  bulk ;  but 
it  has  a  brown  Bark,  and  the  Wood  is  reddifh.  It  bears  no 
refemblance  to  that  fort  we  have  in  Europe.  It  yields  a  Sap, 
which  has  a  much  pleafanter  tafte  than  the  beft  Limonade  or 
Cherry-water,  and  makes  the  wholfomeft  drink  in  the  World. 
This  Liquor  is  drawn  by  cutting  the  Tree  two  Inches  deep  in 
the  Wood,  the  cut  being  run  floping  to  the  length  of  ten  or 
twelve  Inches.  At  the  lower  end  of  this  gafh,  a  Knife  is  thruft 
into  the  Tree  flopingly,  fo  that  the  water  running  along  the 
Cut  or  Gafh,  as  through  a  Gutter,  and  falling  upon  the  Knife 
that  lies  acrofs  the  Channel,  runs  out  upon  the  Knife,  which 
has  Veffels  plac'd  underneath  to  receive  it.  Some  Trees  will 
yield  five  or  fix  Bottles  of  this  water  a  Day  ;  and  fome  Inhabi- 


to  North' AMitnc2i,  -^(yj 

tants  of  Canada^  might  draw  twenty  Hogfheads  of  it  in  one 
day,  if  they  would  thus  cut  and  notch  all  the  Mapples  of  their 
refpedive  Plantations.  The  gafli  do's  no  harm  to  the  Tree. 
Of  this  Sap  they  make  Sugar  and  Syrup,  which  is  fo  valuable, 
that  there  can't  be  a  better  remedy  for  fortifying  the  Stomach. 
'Tis  but  few  of  the  Inhabitants  that  have  the  patience  to  make 
Mapple-JVater^  for  as  common  and  ufual  things  are  always 
flighted,  fo  there's  fcarce  any  body  but  Children  that  give 
themfelves  the  trouble  of  gafhing  thefe  Trees.  To  conclude, 
the  North-Country  Mapples  have  more  Sap  than  thofe  of  the 
South  Countries  ;  but  at  the  fame  time  the  Sap  is  not  fo  fweet. 

[250]  There  are  two  forts  of  Nut-trees  in  this  Country. 
The  one  bears  round,  and  the  other  long,  Nuts;  but  neither 
of  'em  is  good  for  any  thing,  no  more  than  the  wild  Chefnuts 
that  grow  in  the  Ilinefe  Country. 

The  Apples  that  grow  upon  lome  of  their  Apple-trees,  eat 
well  when  they  are  Codled,  but  they  are  good  for  nothing 
when  they're  Raw.  Upon  the  Mijfifipi  indeed,  there's  a  fort 
of  Apples  that  have  a  tafte  not  unhke  that  of  fome  European 
Apples.     The  Pears  are  good,  but  very  fcarce. 

The  Cherries  are  fmall,  and  extream  red  ;  and  though  their 
tafte  is  not  good,  yet  the  Roe-bucks  like  'em  fo  well,  that  in 
the  Summer  time  they  fcarce  ever  mifs  to  lye  under  the  Cherry- 
trees  all  Night  long,  efpecially  if  it  blows  hard. 

This  Country  affords  three  forts  of  excellent  Plums,  which 
bear  no  refemblance  to  ours  either  in  figure  or  colour.  Some 
are  long  and  fmall,  fome  are  round  and  thick,  and  fome  very 
little. 


368  Some  New  Voyages 

The  Vines  twine  round  the  Trees  to  the  very  top  ;  and 
the  Branches  of  thofe  Trees  are  fo  cover'd  with  Grapes,  that 
one  would  take  the  Grape  to  be  the  fruit  of  the  Tree.  In  fome 
Countries  of  ^ovt\i-America,  the  Grape  is  little,  but  very  well 
tafted ;  but  towards  the  Mijfifipi^  'tis  long  and  thick,  and  fo  is 
the  clufter.  There  has  been  fome  Wine  prefs'd  from  the 
Grapes  of  that  Country,  which  after  long  (landing  became  as 
fweet  as  Canary,  and  as  black  as  Ink. 

The  Citrons  of  '^ovth-America  are  fo  call'd,  only  becaufe 
their  form  refembles  that  of  our  Citron.  Inftead  of  a  Rind, 
they  have  only  a  fingle  Skin.  They  grow  upon  a  Plant  that 
rifes  three  Foot  high,  and  do's  not  bear  above  three  or  four 
at  a  time.  This  Fruit  is  as  wholfom  as  its  Root  is  dangerous ; 
for  the  one  is  very  Healthy,  and  the  juice  of  the  other  is  a 
mortal  fubtile  Poyfon.^  While  I  ftay'd  at  Fort  Frontenac, 
[251]  in  the  year  1684,  I  faw  an  Iroqueje  Woman  take  down 
this  fatal  Potion,  with  a  defign  to  follow  her  deceas'd  Hus- 
band ;  after  fhe  had  took  leave  of  her  Friends,  and  fung  the 
Death  Song,  with  the  Formalities  that  are  ufual  among  thefe 
blind  Wretches.  The  Poifon  quickly  work'd  the  defir'd 
eflfed  ;  for  this  Widdow,  who  in  Europe  would  be  juftly  look'd 
upon  as  a  miracle  of  Conftancy  and  Fidelity,  had  no  fooner 
fwallowed  the  murdering  Juice,  than  fhe  fell  into  two  or  three 
fhivering  Fits,  and  fo  expir'd. 

The  JVater-Melons,  call'd  by  the  Spaniards  Algiers  Melons^ 


^  Doubtless  Lahontan  here  refers  to  the  may  apple  or  mandrake  {Podophyllum 
peltatum) ,  from  whose  root  a  poison  may  be  extracted.  The  Jesuit  missionaries 
called  this  fruit  citron.  —  Ed. 


to  iVor^Z^-America.  369 

are  round  and  thick  like  a  Ball;  fome  are  red,  and  fome  white, 
and  the  kernels,  which  are  very  large,  are  fometimes  black, 
fometimes  red.  As  for  their  tafte,  'tis  exadly  the  fame  with 
that  of  the  Spanijh  or  Portiigueze  Melons. 

The  Citrtih  of  this  Country  are  fweet,  and  of  a  diflferent 
nature  from  thofe  of  Em-ope;  and  I'm  inform'd,  that  the 
American  Citruls  will  not  grow  in  Europe.  They  are  as  big  as 
our  Melons;  and  their  Pulp  is  as  yellow  as  Saffron.  Com- 
monly they  are  bak'd  in  Ovens,  but  the  better  way  is  to  roaft 
'em  under  the  Embers,  as  the  Savages  do.  Their  tafte  is 
much  the  fame  with  that  of  the  Marmelade  of  Apples,  only 
they  are  fweeter.  One  may  eat  as  much  of  'em  as  he  pleafes, 
without  fearing  any  diforder  from  'em.^ 

The  wild  Goofeberries  are  good  for  nothing,  but  for  Con- 
fits  :  But  that  fort  of  Confits  are  feldom  made,  for  Sugar  is 
too  dear  in  Canada,  to  be  imploy'd  for  fuch  ufes. 


^  For  the  citrul  (citrouille) ,  see  p.  148,  note  2,  ante.  —  Ed. 


24 


370  Some  New  Voyages 


[252]  A  Defcription  of  the  Trees  and  Fruits  of  the  Northern 
Countries. 

THE  Canada  Birch-trees  are  much  different  from  thofe  we 
have  in  fome  Provinces  of  France;  both  for  bulk  and 
quality.  The  Savages  make  Canows  of  their  Bark,  fome  of 
which  is  red,  and  fome  white;  but  both  are  equally  proper 
for  that  ufe.  That  which  has  the  feweft  Veins  and  Chops,  is 
the  beft;  but  the  red  bark  makes  the  fineft  (how.  There 
are  fome  little  Baskets  made  of  the  young  Birches,  that  are 
much  efteem'd  in  France;  and  Books  may  be  made  of  'em,  the 
Leaves  of  which  will  be  as  fine  as  Paper.  This  I  can  fpeak 
by  experience,  for  I  have  frequently  made  ufe  of  'em  for  want 
of  Paper,  in  writing  the  Journal  of  my  Voyages.  Nay,  I 
remember  I  have  feen  in  a  certain  Library  in  France^  a  Manu- 
fcript  of  the  Gofpel  of  St.  Matthew,  written  in  Greek  upon  this 
fort  of  Bark ;  and,  which  is  yet  more  furprifmg,  I  was  then 
told,  that  it  had  been  written  above  a  thoufand  years ;  and  at 
the  fame  time  I  dare  fwear,  that  'twas  the  Genuine  Birch-bark 
of  NQv/'FrancCy  which  in  all  appearance  was  not  then  dif- 
cover'd. 

The  Pine-trees  are  very  tall,  ftraight,  and  thick;  and  are 
made  ufe  of  for  Mafts,  which  the  King's  Pinks  do  oftentimes 
tranfport  to  France.  'Tis  faid,  that  fome  of  thefe  Trees  are 
big  enough,  to  ferve  for  a  Maft  to  a  Firft-rate  Ship. 


to  iVo;YZ>- America.  371 

The  Epinette  is  a  fort  of  a  Pine,  with  a  fharper  and  thicker 
Leaf.  'Tis  made  ufe  of  in  Carpenters  work,  and  the  matter 
which  drains  from  it,  fmells  as  fweet  as  Incenfe.^ 

There  are  three  forts  of  Firs  in  this  Country,  which  are 
faw'd  into  Dales  [deals]  by  certain  Mills,  that  the  Quebec 
Merchants  have  caus'd  to  be  built  in  fome  places. 

[253]  The  Perujfe  is  the  propereft  of  all  green  Woods  for 
the  building  of  Ships,  upon  the  confederation  that  'tis  com- 
padler,  and  has  clofer  Pores,  fo  that  it  do's  not  foak  or  drink 
in  the  moifture  as  much  as  others. 

Here  are  two  forts  of  Cedar,  namely,  the  white  and  the  red  ; 
but  one  muft  view  'em  narrowly  before  he  can  diftinguifh  'em, 
by  reafon  that  both  of  'em  have  much  the  fame  fort  of  Bark. 
Thefe  Trees  are  low,  bufhy,  and  full  of  Branches  and  little 
Leaves,  refembling  the  tag  of  a  Lace.  The  Wood  of  this 
Tree,  is  almoft  as  light  as  Cork ;  and  the  Savages  make  ufe  of 
it  in  the  Wreaths  and  Ribs  of  their  Canows.  The  red  fort 
looks  admirably  well,  and  may  be  made  into  Houfhold-Goods, 
which  will  retain  an  agreeable  fmell  for  ever. 

The  Jfps  are  little  Shrubs,  which  grow  upon  the  fides  of 
Pools  or  Rivers ;  and  in  a  word,  in  moid  and  marfhy  Coun- 
tries. This  Wood  is  the  common  food  of  the  Beavers,  who, 
in  imitation  of  the  Ants,  take  care  to  make  a  colledlion  of  it 
round  their  Hutts  in  the  Autumn,  which  ferves  'em  for  fufte- 
nance  when  the  Ice  imprifons  'em  in  Winter. 

The  White  Wood  is  a  midling  fort  of  Tree,  that's  neither  too 


^  The  "epinette"    has   been   identified   as   the  hemlock  spruce   {Abies   cana- 
densis), —  Ed. 


372  Some  New  Voyages 

big  nor  too  little.  'Tis  almoft  as  light  as  Cedar,  and  as  eafily 
work'd  upon.  The  Inhabitants  of  Canada  make  little  Canows 
of  it,  for  fifhing  and  crofling  the  Rivers. 

Maidenhair  is  as  common  in  the  Forrefts  of  Canada^  as 
Fern  is  in  thofe  of  France^  and  is  efteem'd  beyond  that  of 
other  Countries ;  infomuch,  that  the  Inhabitants  of  Quebec 
prepare  great  quantities  of  its  Syrup,  which  they  fend  to  Paris^ 
Nants,  Rouan,  and  feveral  other  Cities  in  France. 

Strawberries  and  Rasberries,  are  wonderfully  plentiful  in 
Canada,  and  tafte  extream  well.  We  meet  likewife  with  fome 
white  Goofeberries  in  this  Country ;  but  they  ferve  for  no 
ufe,  unlefs  it  be  to  make  a  fort  of  Vinegar  of  'em,  that  is  very 
ftrong. 

The  Bluets  are  certain  little  Berries,  not  unlike  fmall  Cher- 
ries, only  they  are  black,  and  perfe6lly  round.  The  Plant 
upon  which  they  grow,  is  as  big  as  a  Rasberry-bufh.  Thefe 
Berries  ferve  for  feveral  ufes,  after  they  are  dry'd  in  the  Sun, 
or  in  an  Oven  ;  for  then  they  make  Confits  of  'em,  or  put  'em 
into  Pyes,  or  infufe  'em  in  Brandy.  The  North-Country  Sav- 
ages make  a  Crop  of  'em  in  the  Summer,  which  affords  'em 
very  feafonable  relief,  efpecially  when  their  hunting  comes 
fhort.i 


^"  Bluet"  is  the  term  still  used  by  Canadians  for  the  blueberry  {Vaccinium 
canadense) .  —  Ed. 


to  North'hxi\mc2i,  373 


A  General  View  of  the  Commerce  of  Canada. 

I  COME  now  to  give  a  brief  and  general  account  of  the 
Commerce  of  Canada^  which  I  have  already  touch'd  upon 
in  my  Letters.  The  Normans  were  the  firft  that  fet  up  this 
trade,  and  ufually  they  fet  out  from  Havre  de  Grace,  or  Dieppe  ; 
but  the  Rochellers  have  now  work'd  'em  out  of  it,  for  as  much 
as  the  Rochel  Ships  furnifh  the  Inhabitants  of  that  Continent 
with  the  neceffary  Commodities.  There  are  likewife  fome 
Ships  fent  to  Canada  from  Bourdeaux  and  Bayonne,  with  Wines, 
Brandy,  Tobacco,  and  Iron. 

The  Ships  bound  from  France  to  that  Country,  pay  no 
Cuflom  for  their  Cargo,  whether  in  clearing  in  France,  or  in 
their  entries  at  Quebec;  abating  for  the  Brazil Tohd.cco  which 
pays  five  Sols  a  pound ;  that  is  to  fay,  a  Roll  of  400  pound 
weight,  pays  a  hundred  Livres  by  way  of  Entry,  to  the  Office 
of  the  Farmers-General.^ 

Moft  of  the  Ships  go  laden  to  Canada,  and  return  light  or 
empty.  Some  indeed  bring  home  Peafe  when  they  are  good 
cheap  in  the  Colony,  and  others  take  in  a  Cargo  of  Planks 


^  In  addition  to  large  quantities  of  tobacco  raised  in  New  France,  much  was 
imported,  this  being  preferred  by  both  Indians  and  habitants.  As  early  as  1676  an 
impost  of  ten  per  cent  advalorem  was  laid  upon  Brazil  tobacco  ;  five  sols  being  equiva- 
lent to  about  nineteen  cents  in  the  American  money  of  to-day,  tlie  retail  price  of  im- 
ported tobacco  must,  at  that  rate,  liave  reached  nearly  two  dollars  per  pound.  —  Ed. 


374  Some  New  Voyages 

and  Boards:  Others  again  go  to  the  Ifland  of  Cape  Breton, 
and  there  [255]  take  in  a  Cargoe  of  Pit-Coal,  which  they  carry 
to  the  Iflands  of  Martinico  or  Guardaloupa,  where  the  refining 
of  Sugars  occafions  a  great  confumption  of  Coals.  But 
thofe  Ships  which  either  belong,  or  are  recommended  to  the 
topping  Merchants  of  the  Colony,  are  fraughted  with  Skins, 
which  turns  to  a  great  account.  I  have  feen  fome  Ships 
unload  at  Quebec,  and  then  fteer  to  Placentia,  to  take  in  Cod- 
fifh  which  they  purchas'd  with  ready  Mony;  but  generally 
fpeaking,  there's  more  loft  than  got  by  that  way  of  trading. 
The  Merchant  that  has  carried  on  the  greateft  trade  in 
Canada,  is  the  Sieur  Samuel  Bernon  of  Rochel,  who  has  great 
Ware-Houfes  at  Quebec,  from  which  the  Inhabitants  of  the 
other  Towns  are  fupplied  with  fuch  Commodities  as  they 
want.^  'Tis  true,  there  are  fome  Merchants  at  Quebec,  who 
are  indifferent  rich,  and  fit  out  Ships  upon  their  own  bottom, 
that  ply  to  and  again  between  France  and  Canada;  and  thefe 
Merchants  have  their  Correfpondents  at  Rachel,  who  fend  out 
and  take  in  every  year  the  Cargoes  of  their  Ships. 

There's  no  difference  between  the  Pyrates  that  fcowr  the 
Seas,  and  the  Canada  Merchants ;  unlefs  it  be  this,  that  the 
former  fometimes  inrich  'emfelves  all  of  a  fudden  by  a  good 
Prize ;  and  that  the  latter  can't  make  their  fortune  without 
trading  for  five  or  fix  years,  and  that  without  running  the 
hazard  of  their  Lives.  I  have  known  twenty  little  Pedlars 
that  had  not  above  a  thoufand  Crowns  ftock  when  I  arriv'd  at 


1  Bernon  was  a  Huguenot,  whom  the  bishop  required  the  governor  to  order  out 
of  his  domain.     See  Parkman,  Old  Regime,  pp.  291,  292.  —Ed. 


to  7V<?r^/6-America.  375 

Quebec^  in  the  year  1683;  and  when  I  left  that  place,  had  got 
to  the  tune  of  twelve  thoufand  Crowns.  'Tis  an  unqueftion'd 
truth,  that  they  get  fifty  per  Cent  upon  all  the  Goods  they  deal 
in,  whether  they  buy  'em  up  upon  the  arrival  of  the  Ships  at 
Quebec^  or  have  'em  from  France  by  way  of  Commiffion  ;  but 
over  and  above  that,  there  are  fome  little  gaudy  Trinkets, 
fuch  as  Ribbands,  Laces,  Embroideries,  Tobacco-Boxes, 
Watches,  [256]  and  an  infinity  of  other  baubles  of  Iron  Ware, 
upon  which  they  get  a  hundred  and  fifty  per  Cent,  all  Cofl:s 
clear. 

In  this  Country  a  Hogfhead  of  Boiirdeaux  Wine,  which 
contains  250  Bottles,  is  worth  about  forty  French  Livres,  in 
time  of  Peace,  and  fixty  in  time  of  War.  A  Hogfhead  of 
Nants  or  Bayonne  Brandy,  will  fetch  80  or  a  100  Livres.  In 
the  Taverns  a  Bottle  of  Wine  cofts  fix  French  Sous,  and  a 
Bottle  of  Brandy  is  fold  for  twenty.  As  for  dry  Commod- 
ities, their  price  rifes  and  falls  upon  occafion.  Brazil  Tobacco 
is  worth  40  Sous  a  pound  by  way  of  Retail,  and  35  by  Whole- 
fale.  Sugar  will  fetch  at  leaft  20  Sous  a  pound,  and  fome- 
times  25  or  30. 

The  earlieft  Ships  that  come  from  France,  fet  out  com- 
monly in  the  latter  end  of  April,  or  the  beginning  of  May; 
but  to  my  mind,  they  might  fhorten  their  Voyage  by  one 
half,  if  they  put  to  Sea  about  the  middle  of  March,  and  then 
fweep'd  along  the  North  Coaft  of  the  Azores  Iflands;  for  in 
thofe  Seas  the  South  and  South-Eaft  Winds  commonly  blow 
from  the  beginning  of  April,  to  the  end  of  May.  I  have  men- 
tion'd  this  feveral  times  to  the  moft  expert  Pilots ;  but  they 


376  Some  New  Voyages 

ftill  put  me  off  with  the  plea,  that  they  dare  not  fteer  that 
Courfe  for  fear  of  fome  Rocks :  And  yet  thefe  Rocks  are  not 
to  be  met  with  but  in  their  Charts.  I  have  read  fome  Defcrip- 
tions  of  the  Ports,  Roads,  and  Coafts  of  thefe  Iflands,  and  of 
the  adjacent  Seas,  done  by  the  Portugueze,  which  make  no 
mention  of  the  Shelves  that  are  chalk'd  down  in  all  our 
Charts :  On  the  contrary,  they  affirm  that  the  Coaft  of  thefe 
Iflands  is  altogether  clear,  and  that  for  twenty  Leagues  off 
into  the  Main,  thefe  imaginary  Rocks  were  never  met  with. 
As  foon  as  the  French  Ships  arrive  at  Quebec,  the  Mer- 
chants of  that  City  who  have  their  Fadtours  in  the  other 
Towns,  load  their  Barques  with  Goods  in  [257]  order  to 
tranfport  'em  to  thefe  other  Towns.  Such  Merchants  as  a6l 
for  themfelves  at  Trois  Rivieres,  or  Monreal,  they  come  down 
in  Perfon  to  Quebec  to  Market  for  themfelves,  and  then  put 
their  Effedls  on  board  of  Barques,  to  be  convey'd  home.  If 
they  pay  for  their  Goods  in  Skins,  they  buy  cheaper  than  if 
they  made  their  payments  in  Money  or  Letters  of  Exchange ; 
by  reafon  that  the  Seller  gets  confiderably  by  the  Skins  when 
he  returns  to  France.  Now,  you  muft  take  notice,  that  all  thefe 
Skins  are  bought  up  from  the  Inhabitants,  or  from  the  Sav- 
ages, upon  which  the  Merchants  are  confiderable  Gainers. 
To  give  you  an  inftance  of  this  matter.  A  Perfon  that  lives 
in  the  Neighbourhood  of  Quebec,  carries  a  dozen  of  Martins 
Skins,  five  or  fix  Foxes  Skins,  and  as  many  Skins  of  wild  Cats, 
to  a  Merchants  Houfe,  in  order  to  fell  'em  for  Woollen 
Cloth,  Linnen,  Arms,  Ammunition,  &c.  In  the  truck  of  thefe 
Skins,  the  Merchant  draws  a  double  profit,  one  upon  the 


to  North- Kmtnc?i,  377 

fcore  of  his  paying  no  more  for  the  Skins,  than  one  half  of 
what  he  afterwards  fells  'em  for  in  the  lump  to  the  Fadtours 
for  the  Rochel  Ships ;  and  the  other  by  the  exorbitant  rate  he 
puts  upon  the  Goods  that  the  poor  Planter  takes  in  exchange 
for  his  Skins.  If  this  be  duly  weigh'd,  we  will  not  think  it 
ftrange  that  thefe  Merchants  have  a  more  beneficial  Trade, 
than  a  great  many  other  Tradefmen  in  the  World.  In  my 
feventh  and  eighth  Letter,  I  related  the  particulars  of  the 
Commerce  of  this  Country,  efpecially  that  which  the  Inhab- 
itants carry  on  with  the  Savages,  who  fupply  'em  with  the 
Skins  of  Beavers,  and  other  Animals.  So  that  now  it  remains 
only  to  give  you  an  Inventory  of  the  Goods  that  are  proper 
for  the  Savages,  and  of  the  Skins  which  they  give  in  exchange, 
together  with  their  neat  [net]  Prices. 

[258]   Short  and  light  Fufees. 

Powder. 

Ball  and  cut  Lead,  or  Small-fhot. 

Axes  both  great  and  fmall. 

Knives  with  their  Sheaths. 

Sword-blades  to  make  Darts  of. 

Kettles  oi  all  fizes. 

Shoomakers  Awls. 

Fifh-hooks,  of  all  fizes. 

Flint  Stones. 

Caps  of  blew  Serge. 

Shirts  made  of  the  common  Brittany  Linnen. 

Woolfted  Stockins,  fhort  and  coarfe. 

Brafil  Tobacco. 


37^  Some  New  Foyages 

Coarfe  white  Thread  for  Nets. 

Sewing  Thread  of  feveral  colours. 

Pack-thread. 

Vermillion. 

Needles,  both  large  and  fmall. 

Venice  Beads. 

Some  Iron  Heads  for  Arrows,  but  few  of  'em. 

A  fmall  quantity  of  Soap. 

A  few  Sabres  or  Cutlaffes. 

Brandy  goes  off  incomparably  well. 


to  iVor^/6-America.  379 


The  Names  of  the  Skins  given  in  exchange^   with   their 
Rates. 

THE    Skins  of  Winter   Beavers,  alias  Mtifcovy   Beavers, 
are   worth  per  pound  in   the    Farmer   Generals  Ware- 

houfe.  —        —        —        —  4  Livres.     10  Sous. 

The  Skins  of  fat  Beavers,  the  Hair  of  which  falls 

off,  while  the  Savages  make  ufe  of  'em,  per  pound,^  5  L.  o5. 
Of  Beavers  taken  in  Autumn,  per  pound  —  —  3  10 
[259]  Of  dry  or  common  Beavers,  per  pound        —     3  o 

Of  Summer  Beavers,  per  pound.        —        —        —     3  o 

The  Skin  of  a  white  Beaver  is  not  to  be  valued, 
no  more  than  that  of  a  Fox  that's  quite  black. 
The  Skins  of  Silver-colour'd  Foxes  a  piece. 
Of  common  Foxes,  in  good  order,  —         — 
Of  the  common  Martins.       —        —        — 
Of  the  prettyeft  fort  of  Martins.      —        — 
Of  red  and  fmooth  Otters.     —         —        — 
Of  the  Winter  and  brown  Otters.    —        — 

or  more. 


4 

0 

2 

0 

I 

0 

4 

0 

2 

0 

4 

ID 

^  The  skins  of  beavers  most  valued  by  the  French  were  those  known  as  castor 
gras  d'hiver  (fat  winter  beaver);  that  is,  skins  killed  in  the  winter,  then  made  by 
the  savages  into  robes,  and  worn  long  enough  to  be  thoroughly  greased  by  contact 
with  their  bodies.  See  Perrot,  Memoire  sur  les  Maeurs,  Coustumes  et  Relligion  des 
Sauvages  de  VAmirique  Septentrionale  (Paris,  1864),  p.  317. — Ed. 


380  Some  New  Voyages 

Li<vres.    Sous. 

Of  the  fineft  black  Bears.       —        —        —  —  7  o 

The  Skins  of  Elks  before  they're  drefs'd,  are  worth 

per  pound  dhout.     —         —         —        —  —  o  12 

The  Skins  of  Stags  are  worth  per  pound  about  —  o  8 

The  wild  Cats  or  Enfans  de  Diable,  a  piece  —  i  15 

Sea  Wolves  —  apiece.            —        —        —  —  i  15 

or  more. 

Pole-Cats,  and  Weafels          —        —        —  —  o  10 

Musk  Rats.      —        —        _-        —        —  —  q  6 

Their  Tefticles.            —         —         —         —  —  o  5 

Wolves.             —         —         —         —         —  —  2  10 

The  white  Elk-skins,  i.  e.  thofe  drefs'd  by  the  Sava- 
ges a  piece  —        —        —         —         —  —  8orm. 

A  drefs'd  Harts  Skin  is  worth          —        —  —  5  or  m. 

A  Caribous       —        —        —         —         —  —  6 

A  Roe-buck's   —        —        —        —        —  —  3 

To  conclude,  you  muft  take  notice  that  thefe  Skins  are 
upon  fome  particular  occafions  dearer  than  I  rate  'em,  but  the 
difference  is  but  very  fmall,  whether  under  or  over.^ 

1  For  comparison  with  this  interesting  table  of  prices,  see  that  given  for  1713  in 
Martin,  Casiorologia,  pp,  no,  iii  ;  those  for  about  1750,  in  Jesuit  Relations,  Ixiv, 
p.  127 ;  and  those  at  the  beginning  of  the  English  regime,  in  Henry,  Travels,  pp. 
55,  56.  — Ed. 


to  iVor^/6- America.  381 


[260]       An  Account   of  the   Government   of  Canada   in 
General. 

IN  Canada  the  Politick,  Civil,  Ecclefiaftical  and  Military 
Government,  are  all  in  a  manner  one  thing,  in  regard,  that 
the  wifeft  Governours  have  fubjedled  their  Authority  to  that 
of  the  Ecclefiaflkks ;  and  fuch  Governours  as  would  not  im- 
barque  in  that  intereft,  have  found  their  Poft  fo  uneafie,  that 
they  have  been  recall'd  with  difgrace.  I  could  inftance  in 
feveral,  who  for  not  adhering  to  the  Sentiments  of  the  Bifhop 
and  the  Jefuits,  and  for  refufing  to  lodge  their  Power  in  the 
hands  of  thefe  infallible  Gentlemen,  have  been  turn'd  out,  and 
treated  at  Court  like  hot-headed  Incendiaries.  Mr.  de  Fron- 
tenac  was  one  of  this  number,  who  made  fuch  an  unhappy  exit ; 
for  he  fell  out  with  Mr.  Duchefnau,  Intendant  of  that  Country, 
who  finding  himfelf  protected  by  the  Clergy,  induftrioufly  in- 
fulted  that  illuftrious  General ;  and  the  General  was  forc'd  to 
give  way,  under  the  weight  of  an  Ecclefiaftical  League,  by 
reafon  of  the  Springs  they  fet  at  work  againft  him,  in  oppofi- 
tion  to  all  the  principles  of  Honour  and  Confcience.^ 

The  Governour  General  that  means  to  negled  no  oppor- 
tunity of  advancing  or  inriching  themfelves,  do  commonly 


1  Lahontan,  as  a  partisan  of  Frontenac,  presents  his  side  of  the  disagreements  with 
Duchesneau.  For  an  account  of  their  petty  quarrels,  which  led  to  the  recall  (1682)  of 
both  governor  and  intendant,  see  Parkman,  Frontenac,  pp.  44-71.  —  Ed. 


382  Some  New  Voyages 

hear  two  Maffes  a  Day,  and  are  oblig'd  to  confefs  once  in  four 
and  twenty  hours.  He  has  always  Clergy-men  hanging  about 
him  where-ever  he  goes,  and  indeed  properly  fpeaking,  they 
are  his  Counfellours.  When  a  Governour  is  thus  back'd  by 
the  Clergy ;  the  Intendants,  the  Under-Governours,  and  the 
Sovereign  Council,  dare's  not  cenfure  his  Condu6l,  let  it  be 
never  fo  faulty ;  for  the  protedtion  of  the  Ecclefiafticks,  fhel- 
ters  him  from  all  the  charges  that  can  be  laid  againft  him. 

The  Governour  General  of  Quebec^  has  twenty  thoufand 
Crowns  a  year,  including  the  pay  of  his  [261]  Company  of 
Guards,  and  the  particular  Government  of  the  Fort.  Over 
and  above  this  Income,  the  Farmers  of  the  Beaver-Skins  make 
him  a  Prefent  of  a  thoufand  Crowns  a  year ;  his  Wines  and  all 
his  other  Provifions  imported  from  France  pay  no  Fraight; 
not  to  mention  that  by  certain  ways  and  means  he  fucks  as 
much  Money  out  of  the  Country,  as  all  the  above  mention'd 
Articles  amount  to.  The  Intendant  has  eighteen  thoufand 
Livres  a  year ;  but  the  Lord  knows  what  he  makes  otherwife : 
I  have  no  mind  to  touch  there,  for  fear  of  being  rank'd  among 
thofe  Detradors,  who  fpeak  the  truth  too  fincerely.^  The 
Bifhops  Incomes  are  fo  fmall,  that  if  the  King  were  not  gra- 
cioufly  pleas'd  to  add  to  his  Bifhoprick  fome  other  Benefices 
in  France^  that  Reverend  Prelate  would  be  reduc'd  to  as  fhort 


^The  office  of  intendant  was  established  in  New  France  when  the  King  took  over 
the  colony  from  the  hands  of  the  commercial  company  (1663).  It  was  analagous  to 
the  intendancy  in  France,  and  created  substantially  a  second  head  to  the  colony,  causing 
much  friction  with  the  governor  general.  The  duties  of  the  intendant  were  numerous, 
and  the  powers  vague  and  far-reaching  ;  he  was  especially  charged  with  the  admin- 
istration of  finance  and  justice.  For  a  list  of  both  governors  and  intendants  in  New 
France,  see  Jesuit  Relations,  Ixxii,  pp.  1 16-1 18.  —  Ed. 


to  North'Avi\Q.nc2i,  383 

Commons,  as  a  hundred  of  his  Charadler  are  in  the  Kingdom 
of  Naples}  The  Major  of  Quebec  has  fix  hundred  Crowns  a 
year,  the  Governour  of  Trois  Rivieres  has  a  thoufand  ;  and  the 
Governour  of  Monreal  is  allow'd  two  thoufand. ^  A  Captain 
has  a  hundred  and  twenty  Livres  a  Month,  a  Lieutenant  ninety 
Livres,  a  reform'd  Lieutenant  is  allow'd  but  forty,  and  a  com- 
mon Soldier's  pay  is  fix  Sous  a  Day,  of  the  current  Money  of 
the  Country. 

The  People  repofe  a  great  deal  of  confidence  in  the  Clergy 
in  this  Country  as  well  as  elfewhere.  Here  the  outward  fhew 
of  Devotion  is  ftrldlly  obferv'd,  for  the  People  dare  not  abfent 
from  the  great  Mafl'es  and  Sermons,  without  a  lawful  Excufe. 
But  after  all,  'tis  at  the  time  of  Divine  Service,  that  the  mar- 
ried Women  and  Maids  give  their  humours  a  full  loofe,  as 
being  affur'd  that  their  Husbands  and  Mothers  are  bufie  at 
Church.  The  Priefts  call  People  by  their  names  in  the  Pul- 
pit ;  they  prohibit  under  the  pain  of  Excommunication,  the 
reading  of  Romances  and  Plays,  as  well  as  the  ufe  of  Masks, 
and  playing  at  Ombre  or  Lanfquenet.  The  Jefuits  [262]  and 
the  Recollets  agree  as  ill  as  the  Molinifts  and  the  Janfenifts.^ 


1  Laval,  first  bishop  of  Quebec,  was  titular  bishop  of  Petraea,  and  had  a  large 
private  fortune  ;  see  p.  43,  note  2,  anie.  St.  Vallier,  the  second  bishop,  was  abbe  of 
a  rich  monastery  of  that  name  in  France.  —  Ed. 

2  The  three  local  divisions  of  New  France.  In  1722  the  government  of  Quebec 
comprised  forty-one  parishes.  Three  Rivers  thirteen,  and  Montreal  twenty-eight. 
Frontenac  attempted  to  establish  a  rudimentary  type  of  self-government,  by  permitting 
the  inhabitants  to  elect  their  local  officials  ;  but  the  autocratic  paternalism  of  the 
French  court  reversed  these  plans,  and  all  officials  were  thereafter  appointed  by  the 
King.  —  Ed. 

^The  Molinists  and  Jansenists  were  two  schools  of  theologians,  the  former  fol- 
lowers of  the  Jesuit  Molina  (1535-1600) ,  the  latter  those  of  the  Dutch  scholar  Jansen 


384  Some  New  Voyages 

The  former  pretend  that  the  latter  have  no  right  to  confefs. 
Do  but  look  back  to  my  eighth  Letter,  and  there  you'll  fee 
fome  inftances  of  the  indifcreet  zeal  of  the  Ecclefiafticks. 

The  Governour  General  has  the  difpofal  of  all  Military 
Pofts;  He  beftows  Companies,  Lieutenancies,  and  Under- 
Lieutenancies,  upon  who  he  pleafes,  with  his  Majefty's  gracious 
Approbation;  but  he  is  not  allow'd  to  difpofe  of  particular 
Governourfhips,  or  of  the  place  of  a  Lord  Lieutenant  of  a 
Province,  or  of  the  Major  of  any  Town.  He  is  impower'd 
to  grant  to  the  Gentry  and  the  other  Inhabitants,  Lands  and 
Settlements  all  over  Canada  ;  but  thefe  Grants  muft  be  given 
in  concert  with  the  Intendant.  He  is  likewife  authoris'd  to 
give  five  and  twenty  Licences  a  year  to  whom  he  thinks  fit, 
for  trading  with  the  Savage  Nations  of  that  vaft  Continent. 
He  is  invefted  with  the  power  of  fufpending  the  execution  of 
Sentences  againft  Criminals ;  and  by  vertue  of  this  Reprieve, 
can  eafily  procure  'em  a  Pardon,  if  he  has  a  mind  to  favour 
'em.  But  he  can't  difpofe  of  the  King's  Money,  without  the 
confent  of  the  Intendant,  who  is  the  only  Man  that  can  call  it 
out  of  the  hands  of  the  Treafurer  of  the  Navy.^ 


(1585-1638).  The  controversy  agitated  Western  Europe  throughout  the  seventeenth 
century,  involved  courts  and  society,  and  had  a  profound  influence  upon  French  liter- 
ature. In  his  later  years,  Louis  XIV,  prompted  by  the  Jesuits,  persecuted  the  party 
of  the  Jansenists,  and  finally  broke  up  their  retreat  at  Port  Royal.  —  Ed. 

^The  governor-general  of  Canada,  usually  a  military  noble,  was  commandant  of 
the  army,  leader  of  military  expeditions,  supreme  arbiter  of  life  and  death  in  criminal 
justice  —  in  short,  representative  of  the  king  and  of  paternal  government  in  the  colony. 
For  his  commissions,  see  Edits  et  Ordonnances  (Quebec,  1856),  iii,  pp.  5-81.  On 
the  subject  of  licenses  {conges),  see  p.  99,  note  i,  ante.  The  "Treasurer  of  the 
Navy  "  is  the  English  translator's  rendition  of  the  Department  of  the  Marine,  which 
had  the  colonies  in  charge.  —  Ed. 


to  North- Axntnc?i,  385 

The  Governour  General  can't  be  without  the  fervice  of  the 
Jefuits,  In  making  Treaties  with  the  Governours  of  New- 
England^  and  New-Tork,  as  well  as  with  the  Iroqiiefe.  I  am  at  a 
lofs  to  know,  whether  thefe  good  Fathers  are  imploy'd  in  fuch 
Services,  upon  the  fcore  of  their  judicious  Counfels,  and  their 
being  perfedly  well  acquainted  with  the  Country,  and  the 
King's  true  interefts ;  or  upon  the  confideration  of  their 
fpeaking  to  a  Miracle,  the  Languages  of  fo  many  different 
Nations,  whofe  intereft  are  quite  oppofite ;  or  out  of  a  fenfe 
of  that  condefcenfion  and  fubmifTion,  that  is  due  to  thefe 
worthy  Companions  of  our  Saviour.^ 

[263]  The  Members  of  the  fupreme  Council  of  Canada^ 
can't  fell  or  convey  their  Places  to  their  Heirs,  or  to  any  body 
elfe  without  the  King's  approbation;  though  at  the  fame 
time  their  places  may  be  worth  not  fo  much  as  the  place  of 
a  Lieutenant  to  a  Company  of  Foot.^  When  they  have  nice 
points  under  their  confideration,  they  ufually  confult  the 
Priefts  or  Jefuits :  And  if  any  caufe  comes  before  'em,  in 
which  thefe  good  Fathers  are  interefs'd,  they  are  fure  not  to 
be  caft,  unlefs  it  be  fo  very  black,  that  the  cunningeft  Lawyer 
can't  give  it  a  plaufible  turn.  I've  been  inform'd  by  feveral 
Perfons,  that  the  Jefuits  drive  a  great  trade  in  European  Com- 


^  The  employment  of  the  Jesuit  missionaries  as  envoys  and  interpreters  was  not 
only  due  to  their  skill  in  languages,  but  to  their  large  acquaintance  with  the  habits  and 
customs  of  the  Indians,  and  a  certain  degree  of  ascendancy  which  they  had  acquired 
over  the  latter's  minds.  The  negotiations  with  New  England  and  New  York  dealt 
almost  entirely  with  Indian  relations.  —  Ed. 

2  For  the  sovereign  council  of  New  France,  see  p.  41,  note  3,  ante.     In  1703  the 
title  was  changed  to  superior  council.     In  a  few  cases,  the  king  permitted  a  son  to 
succeed  his  father  in  this  office.     See  Parkman,  Old  Regime,  pp.  274,  275.  —Ed. 
26 


386  Some  New  Voyages 

modities,  and  Canada  Skins ;  but  I  can  fcarce  believe  it,  or  at 
leaft  if  it  be  fo,  they  muft  have  Correfpondents  and  Fadtors  that 
are  as  clofe  and  cunning  as  themfelves;  which  can  never  be.^ 
The  Gentlemen  of  that  Country,  are  oblig'd  to  be  very 
cautious  in  carrying  even  with  the  Ecclefiafticks^  in  refpedl  of  the 
good  or  harm  that  the  good  Fathers  can  indiredly  throw  in 
their  way.  The  Bifhop  and  the  Jefuits  have  fuch  an  influence 
over  the  Governours  General,  as  is  fufficient  to  procure  places 
to  the  Children  of  the  Noblemen  or  Gentlemen  that  are 
devoted  to  their  Service,  or  to  obtain  the  Licences  that  I 
fpoke  of  in  my  eighth  Letter.  'Tis  likewife  in  their  power 
to  ferve  the  Daughters  of  fuch  Gentlemen,  by  finding  'em 
agreeable  and  rich  Husbands.  The  meanefl  Curates  muft 
be  manag'd  cautioufly,  for  they  can  either  ferve  or  differve 
the  Gentlemen,  in  whofe  Seignories  they  are  no  more  than 
Miflionaries,  there  being  no  fix'd  Cures  in  Canada^  which 
indeed  is  a  grievance  that  ought  to  be  redrefs'd.^  The  Officers 
of  the  Army  are  likewife  oblig'd  to  keep  up  a  good  corre- 
fpondence  with  the  Eccleftafticks^  for  without  that  'tis  impofUble 
for  'em  to  keep  their  ground.  They  muft  not  only  take  care 
that  their  own  condud:  be  regular;  but  likewife  [264]  look 


^  The  charge  was  often  made  that  the  missionaries  participated  in  the  advantages 
of  the  fur-trade.  There  is  evidence  that  this  was  sometimes  true  before  1642  ;  but 
there  was  passed  about  that  time  a  stringent  order  against  it,  and  they  thenceforth 
almost  wholly  refrained,  except  in  the  case  of  lay  brothers,  and  an  occasional  trans- 
gressor who  was  speedily  punished.     See  Jesuit  Relations,  index.  —  Ed. 

^Lahontan  probably  means  that  all  the  parish  priests  (cures)  were  affiliated 
with  the  seminary  which  Bishop  Laval  had  established  ;  see  p.  42,  note  i,  ante.  St. 
Vallier  attempted  to  break  up  the  system,  and  it  was  probably  in  the  interest  of  this 
movement  that  Lahontan  wrote  as  above.  —  Ed. 


to  North'Ai\\mc2i,  387 

after  that  of  the  Soldiers,  by  preventing  the  Diforders  they 
might  commit  in  their  Quarters. 

Commonly  the  Troops  are  quarter'd  upon  the  Inhabitants 
of  the  Cotes^  or  Seignories  of  Canada,  from  O^ober  to  May. 
The  Matter  of  the  Houfe  furniihes  his  Military  Guefts  only 
with  Utenfils,  and  imploys  him  all  the  while  at  the  rate  of 
ten  Sous  a  Day  befides  his  Vidtuals,  in  the  cutting  of  Wood, 
grubbing  up  of  Grounds,  rooting  out  Stumps,  or  the  threfh- 
ing  of  Corn  in  a  Barn.  The  Captain  gets  likewife  by  their 
work ;  for  to  make  'em  difcount  the  half  of  their  pay  to  him, 
he  orders  'em  to  come  thrice  a  Week  to  exercife  their  Arms 
at  his  Quarters.  Now,  their  Habitations  being  diftant  four 
or  five  Arpents  from  one  another,  and  one  Cote  or  Seignory 
being  two  or  three  Leagues  in  Front,  the  Soldiers  choofe 
rather  to  give  the  Captain  a  fpill,  than  to  walk  fo  far  in  the 
Snow  and  the  Dirt :  And  the  Captain  takes  it  very  confcien- 
tioufly,  upon  the  plea  that  Volenti  non  fit  injuria.  As  for  fuch 
Soldiers  as  are  good  Tradefmen,  he's  fure  of  putting  their 
whole  pay  in  his  Pocket,  by  vertue  of  a  Licence  that  he  gives 
'em  to  work  in  the  Towns,  or  any  where  elfe.  In  fine,  moft  of 
the  Officers  marry  in  this  Country,  but  God  knows  what  fort 
of  Marriages  they  make,  in  taking  Girls  with  a  Dowry,  con- 
fiding of  eleven  Crowns,  a  Cock,  a  Hen,  an  Ox,  a  Cow,  and 
fometimes  a  Calf.  I  knew  feveral  young  Women,  whofe  Lov- 
ers, after  denying  the  Fad,  and  proving  before  the  Judges 
the  fcandalous  Converfation  of  their  Miftreffes,  were  forc'd 
upon  the  perfwafion  of  the  Ecdefiafticks  to  fwallow  the  bitter 
Pill,  and  take  the  very  fame  Girls  in  Marriage.     Some  Officers 


388  Some  New  Voyages 

indeed  marry  well,  but  there  are  few  fuch.  The  occafion  of 
their  marrying  fo  readily  in  that  Country,  proceeds  from  the 
difficulty  of  converfing  with  the  foft  Sex.  After  a  Man  has 
made  four  Vifits  to  a  young  Woman,  he  is  oblig'd  to  unfold 
his  Mind  to  her  Father  and  Mother;  [265]  he  muft  then 
either  talk  of  Marriage,  or  break  off  all  Correfpondence ;  or 
if  he  do's  not,  both  he  and  fhe  lies  under  a  Scandal.  In  this 
Country  a  Man  can't  vifit  another  Man's  Wife,  without  being 
cenfur'd,  as  if  her  Husband  was  a  Cuckold.  In  fine,  a  Man 
can  meet  with  no  diverfion  here,  but  that  of  reading,  or  eating, 
or  drinking.  Though  after  all,  there  are  fome  Intrigues 
carry'd  on,  but  with  the  fame  caution  as  in  Spain,  where  the 
vertue  of  the  Ladies  confifts  only  in  difguifing  the  matter 
handfomly. 

Now,  that  I  am  upon  the  Subjedl  of  Marriage,  I  can't  for- 
bear to  acquaint  you  with  a  comical  Adventure  that  happen'd 
to  a  young  Captain,  who  was  prefs'd  to  marry  againft  his  will, 
becaufe  all  his  Companions  and  Acquaintances  were  already 
buckled.  This  young  Officer  having  made  fome  Vifits  to  a 
Counfellor's  Daughter,  he  was  defir'd  to  tell  what  Errand  he 
came  upon  ;  and  Mr.  de  Frontenac  himfelf,  being  related  to  the 
young  Lady,  who  is  certainly  one  of  the  moft  accomplifli'd 
Ladies  of  this  Age,  us'd  his  utmoft  efforts  to  ingage  the  Cap- 
tain to  marry  her.  The  Captain  being  equally  well  pleas'd 
with  a  free  accefs  to  the  Governour's  Table,  and  the  company 
of  the  Lady  whom  he  met  there  not  unfrequently ;  the  Captain, 
I  fay,  being  equally  fond  of  thefe  two  Advantages,  endeav- 
our'd  to  ward  off  the  defign,  by  asking  fome  time  to  confider 


to  7V(?r^Z>-America.  389 

of  it.  Accordingly,  two  Months  were  granted  him  ;  and  after 
that  time  was  expir'd,  he  had  ftill  a  mind  to  let  out  his  Traces, 
and  fo  defir'd  two  Months  more,  which  were  granted  him  by 
the  Bifhop's  interceffion.  When  the  laft  of  thefe  two  was  at 
an  end,  the  Cavalier  began  to  be  apprehenfive  that  he  was  in 
danger  of  lofing  both  his  good  Cheer,  and  the  agreeable  com- 
pany of  the  Lady.  However,  he  was  oblig'd  to  be  prefent  at 
a  Treat  that  Mr.  Nelfon  (the  EngUfli  Gentleman  I  [266]  fpoke 
of  in  my  23^  Letter)  gave  to  the  two  Lovers,  as  well  as  the 
Governour,  the  Intendant,  the  Bifhop,  and  fome  other  Perfons 
of  Note  :  And  this  generous  Engli/h  Gentleman,  having  a  kind- 
nefs  for  the  young  Ladies  Father,  and  her  Brethren,  upon  the 
fcore  of  their  trading  with  one  another,  made  an  offer  of  a 
thoufand  Crowns  to  be  paid  on  the  Wedding  Day,  which  added 
to  a  thoufand  that  the  Bifhop  oflfer'd,  and  a  thoufand  more 
which  fhe  had  of  her  own,  befides  feven  or  eight  thoufand 
that  Mr.  de  Frontenac  offer'd  in  Licences,  not  to  mention  the 
certain  profpe6l  of  Preferment ;  all  thefe  Items,  I  fay,  made 
the  Marriage  very  advantageous  to  the  Captain.  After  they 
had  done  eating,  he  was  prefs'd  to  fign  the  Contract,  but 
made  anfwer,  that  he  had  drunk  fome  bumpers  of  heady  Wine, 
and  his  Head  was  not  clear  enough  for  weighing  the  conditions 
of  the  Contrad  ;  fo  that  they  were  forc'd  to  put  off  the  matter 
till  the  next  day.  Upon  this  delay  he  kept  his  Chamber  till 
Mr.  de  Frontenac^  at  whofe  Table  he  us'd  to  eat,  fent  for  him 
in  order  to  know  his  Mind  immediately.  Then  there  was  no 
room  left  for  ffiuffling ;  there  was  a  neceffity  of  giving  a  pofi- 
tive  anfwer  to  the  Governour,  who  fpoke  to  him  in  plain  and 


390  Some  New  Voyages 

precife  terms,  and  at  the  fame  time  reminded  him  of  the  favour 
they  had  fhewn  him,  in  allowing  him  fo  much  time  to  confider 
of  the  propos'd  Marriage.  The  young  Officer  reply'd  very 
fairly,  that  any  Man  that  was  capable  of  Marrying  after  four 
Months  deliberation,  was  a  fool  in  buckling  to.  '  I  now  fee, 
'  fays  he,  what  I  am  ;  the  eager  defire  I  had  of  going  to  Church 
'  with  Mademoifelle  D.  .  .  .  has  now  convinc'd  me  of  my  folly; 
'  if  you  have  a  refpedt  for  the  Lady,  pray  do  not  fuffer  her  to 
'  marry  a  young  Spark,  that  is  fo  apt  to  take  up  with  extrava- 
'  gant  and  foolifh  things.  As  for  my  own  part,  Sir,  I  proteft 
'  fincerely,  that  the  little  reafon  and  free  [267]  judgment  that 
'  is  left  me,  will  ferve  to  comfort  me  upon  the  lofs  of  her,  and 
'  to  teach  me  to  repent  of  having  defir'd  to  make  her  as 
'  unhappy  as  my  felf.  This  Difcourfe  furpris'd  the  Bifhop, 
the  Governour,  the  Intendant,  and  in  general,  all  the  other 
Married  Officers,  who  defir'd  nothing  more  than  that  he 
fhould  be  catch'd  in  the  noofe  as  well  as  they ;  fo  true  it  is, 
that  Solamen  miferis  focios  habidjfe  doloris.  As  they  were  far 
from  expedling  any  fuch  retra6lation ;  fo  the  poor  reform'd 
Captain  fuffer'd  for't ;  for  fome  time  after  Mr.  de  Frontenac 
did  him  a  piece  of  Injuftice,  in  bellowing  a  vacant  Company 
over  his  Head,  upon  Madam  de  Ponchartrain's  Nephew,  not- 
withftanding  that  the  Court  had  fent  orders  on  his  behalf; 
and  this  oblig'd  him  to  go  for  France  along  with  me  in  the 
year  1692.^ 


^  Under  this  thin  disguise,  Lahontan  here  relates  an  episode  in  his  own  career. 
The  lady  in  question  was  doubtless  Genevieve,  daughter  of  Mathieu  d' Amours  of  the 
sovereign  council,  whose  brothers  traded  with  Nelson,  the  English  merchant  —  see 


to  N 07'th' A.mmc2i,  3.91 

To  refume  the  thread  of  my  Difcourfe:  You  muft  know 
that  the  Canadeje  or  Creoles,  are  a  robuft  brawny  well  made 
People  ;  they  are  ftrong,  vigorous,  adlive,  brave  and  indefatig- 
able ;  in  a  word,  they  want  nothing  but  the  knowledge  of 
polite  Letters.  They  are  prefumptuous,  and  very  full  of 
themfelves ;  they  value  themfelves  beyond  all  the  Nations  of 
the  Earth,  and,  which  is  to  be  regrated,  they  have  not  that 
veneration  for  their  Parents  that  is  due.  Their  Complexion 
is  wonderfully  pretty.  The  Women  are  generally  handfom ; 
few  of  them  are  brown,  but  many  of  'em  are  at  once  wife  and 
lazy.  They  love  Luxury  to  the  laft  degree,  and  ftrive  to  out- 
do one  another  in  catching  Husbands  in  the  trap. 

There's  an  infinity  of  diforders  in  Canada,  that  want  to  be 
reform'd.  The  firft  ftep  of  a  true  Reformation,  muft  be  that 
of  hindring  the  Ecclefiafticks  to  vifit  the  Inhabitants  fo  often, 
and  to  pry  with  fuch  impertinence  into  the  minuteft  affairs  of 
the  Family;  for  fuch  practices  are  frequently  contrary  to  the 
good  of  the  Society,  and  that  for  reafons  [268]  that  you  are 
not  ignorant  of.  The  next  thing  to  be  done,  is  to  prohibit  the 
Officers  to  ftop  the  Soldiers  pay,  and  to  injoyn  'em  to  Difci- 
pline  their  Men  every  Holy-day,  and  every  Sunday.  In  the 
third  place,  the  Commodities  ought  to  be  rated  at  a  reafon- 
able  price,  fo  that  the  Merchant  may  have  his  profit,  without 
exadling  upon  the  Inhabitants  and  the  Savages.  A  fourth 
Article  of  Reformation,  would  confift  in  prohibiting  the 
exporting  from  France  to  Canada,  of  Brocado's,   Gold  and 


pp.  265,  311,  ante.     Mademoiselle  d'Amours  married  (1703)  Jean  Baptiste  Celoron 
de  Blainviile.     For  further  details,  see  Roy,  Lahontan,  pp.  92,  93.  —Ed. 


392  Some  New  Voyages 

Silver  Galloons  or  Ribbands,  and  rich  Laces.  In  a  fifth  place, 
the  Governour  General  ought  not  to  fell  Licences  for  trading 
with  the  Savages  of  the  great  Lakes.  Sixthly,  there  ought  to 
be  fix'd  Courts.^  In  the  feventh  place,  they  want  to  have 
their  Militia  modell'd  and  difciplin'd,  that  upon  occafion, 
they  may  be  as  ferviceable  as  the  Regular  Troops.^  For  an 
eighth  Article,  the  fetting  up  Manufadories  for  Linnen, 
Stuffs,  &c.  would  be  very  ufeful.^  But  the  moft  important 
alteration  would  confift  in  keeping  the  Governours,  the 
Intendants,  the  fupreme  Council,  the  Bifhops  and  the  Jefuits, 
from  fplitting  into  Fa6lions,  and  making  Clubs  one  againft 
another;  for  the  confequences  of  fuch  Divifions  can't  but 
thwart  his  Majefty's  Service,  and  the  Peace  of  the  Publick. 
Were  this  but  happily  effeded,  that  Country  would  be  as 
rich  again  as  'tis  now. 

I  wonder  that  inftead  of  banifhing  the  Proteftants  out  of 
France^  who  in  removing  to  the  Countries  of  our  Enemies, 


^  It  is  difficult  to  know  what  Lahontan  means  by  "  fixed  courts,"  since  justice  in 
New  France  was  well  administered  by  a  series  of  such.  The  sovereign  council  was 
the  court  of  appeal  ;  judges  held  sessions  in  the  three  towns  of  Montreal,  Three 
Rivers,  and  Quebec  ;  the  seigneurs  administered  justice  in  petty  disputes  ;  and  above 
all  was  the  jurisdiction  of  the  governor  and  intendant,  the  latter  holding  a  special 
court  in  his  palace,  which  was  known  therefrom  as  the  Palace  of  Justice.  — Ed. 

2  Canadians  had  served  as  militia  from  the  foundation  of  the  colony,  no  regular 
troops  coming  out  until  1665.  In  time  of  war  all  the  male  population  between  the 
ages  of  fifteen  and  sixty  was  enrolled  in  the  militia,  and  officers  were  appointed  from 
each  parish,  besides  general  officers  for  especially  exposed  localities.  In  1691,  1313 
Canadians  received  pay  as  soldiers  —  Suite,  Canadiens  franqais ,  vi,  46  ;  vii,  47.  — Ed. 

3  Unlike  the  English  government,  the  French  authorities  stimulated  and  protected 
colonial  manufactures.  But  the  population  was  too  sparse  to  accomplish  much  in 
this  direction.  Some  cloth  had  been  woven  and  articles  in  iron  produced,  and  ship- 
building had  been  inaugurated  early  in  the  eighteenth  century.  — Ed. 


to  North-Kmmc2i,  393 

have  done  fo  much  damage  to  the  Kingdom,  by  carrying  their 
Money  along  with  'em,  and  fetting  up  Manufa6turies  in  thofe 
Countries ;  I  wonder,  I  fay,  that  the  Court  did  not  think  it 
more  proper  to  tranfport  'em  to  Canada.  I'm  convinc'd,  that 
if  they  had  receiv'd  pofitive  affurances  of  injoying  a  liberty  of 
Confcience,  a  great  many  of  'em  would  have  made  no  fcruple 
[269]  to  go  thither.  Some  have  reply'd  upon  this  Head,  that 
the  Remedy  had  been  worfe  than  the  Difeafe ;  in  regard  that 
fome  time  or  other  they  would  not  have  fail'd  to  expel  the 
Catholicks  by  the  afliftance  of  the  Engli/h :  But  I  reprefented 
to  'em,  that  the  Greeks  and  Armenians^  who  are  fubjedl  to  the 
Grand  Seignior^  and  at  the  fame  time  are  of  a  Nation  and 
Religion  that's  different  from  that  of  the  Turks;  I  repre- 
fented, I  fay,  that  thefe  diffenting  Subjeds  did  fcarce  ever 
implore  the  aid  of  foreign  Powers,  in  order  to  rebel  and  fhake 
off  the  Yoak.  In  fine,  we  have  more  reafon  to  believe,  that  if 
the  Huguenots  had  been  tranfported  to  Canada,  they  had  never 
departed  from  the  fealty  they  ow'd  to  their  natural  Soveraign. 
But,  let  that  be  as  it  will ;  I  do  but  fpeak  as  that  King  of 
Arragon  did,  who  boafted,  that  if  God  had  daign'd  to  confult 
him,  he  could  have  given  him  feafonable  advice  with  reference 
to  the  fymmetry  and  the  courfes  of  the  Stars :  For  in  like 
manner,  I  do  affirm,  that  if  the  Council  of  State  had  follow'd 
my  Scheme,  in  the  fpace  of  thirty  or  forty  years,  New-France 
would  have  become  a  finer  and  more  flourifiiing  Kingdom, 
than  feveral  others  in  Europe. 


394  Some  New  Voyages 


A   Difcourfe   of  the   Interefl  of  the  French,  and  of  the 
Englifh,  in  North-Amtricz. 

SINCE  New-France  and  New-England  fubfift  only  upon  the 
Cod-Fifhery,  and  the  Fur-trade,  'tis  the  interefl  of  thefe 
two  Colonies  to  inlarge  the  number  of  the  Ships  imploy'd  in 
the  Fifhery,  and  to  incourage  the  Savages  to  hunt  and  fhoot 
Beavers,  by  furnifhing  them  with  what  Arms  and  Ammunition 
they  have  occafion  for.  'Tis  well  known,  that  there's  a  great 
confumption  of  Codfifh  in  the  [270]  Southern  Countries  of 
Europe,  and  that  few  Commodities  meet  with  a  better  and 
readier  Market,  efpecially  if  they  are  good  and  well  cur'd. 

Thofe  who  alledge  that  the  deftrudllon  of  the  Iroquefe, 
would  promote  the  interefl:  of  the  Colonies  of  New-France, 
are  flrangers  to  the  true  interefl:  of  that  Country ;  for  if  that 
were  once  accompHfh'd,  the  Savages  who  are  now  the  French 
Allies,  would  turn  their  greateft  Enemies,  as  being  then  rid  of 
their  other  fears.  They  would  not  fail  to  call  in  the  Engli/Ii, 
by  reafon  that  their  Commodities  are  at  once  cheaper,  and 
more  efl:eem'd  than  ours ;  and  by  that  means  the  whole  Com- 
merce of  that  wide  Country,  would  be  wrefl:ed  out  of  our 
hands. 

I  conclude  therefore,  that  'tis  the  interefl:  of  the  French  to 
weaken  the  Iroquefe,  but  not  to  fee  'em  intirely  defeated.  I 
own,  that  at  this  day  they  are  too  fl:rong,  infomuch  that  they 


to  N orth- Avi\Qnc2i,  395 

cut  the  Throats  of  the  Savages  our  Allies  every  day.  They 
have  nothing  lefs  in  view,  than  to  cut  off  all  the  Nations  they 
know,  let  their  Situation  be  never  fo  remote  from  their 
Country.  'Tis  our  bufmefs  to  reduce  'em  to  one  half  of  the 
power  they  are  now  poffefs'd  of,  if  'twere  poflible ;  but  we  do 
not  go  the  right  way  to  work.  Above  thefe  thirty  years,  their 
ancient  Counfellors  have  ftill  remonftrated  to  the  Warriours 
of  the  five  Nations,  that  'twas  expedient  to  cut  off  all  the 
Savage  Nations  of  Canada^  in  order  to  ruine  the  Com- 
merce of  the  French^  and  after  that  to  diflodge  'em  of  the 
Continent.  With  this  view  they  have  carry'd  the  War  above 
four  or  five  hundred  Leagues  off  their  Country,  after  the 
deftroying  of  feveral  different  Nations  in  feveral  places,  as  I 
fhew'd  you  before. 

'Twould  be  no  difficult  matter  for  the  French  to  draw  the 
Iroquefe  over  to  their  fide,  to  keep  'em  from  plaguing  the 
French  Allies,  and  at  the  fame  time  to  ingrofs  all  the  Com- 
merce with  the  five  Iroquefe  [271]  Nations,  that  is  now  in  the 
hands  of  the  Englijh  in  New-York.  This  might  be  eafily  put 
in  execution,  provided  the  King  would  allow  ten  thoufand 
Crowns  a  year,  for  that  end.  The  method  of  effecting  it  is 
this.  In  the  firft  place,  the  Barques  that  were  formerly  made 
ufe  of  about  Fort  Frontenac^  muff  be  rebuilt,  in  order  to  con- 
vey to  the  Rivers  of  the  Tfonontouans  and  the  Onontagues^  fuch 
Commodities  as  are  proper  for  'em,  and  to  fell  'em  for  the 
prime  coft  in  France}     Now  this  would  put  the  King  to  the 

^  By  1677  La  Salle  had  four  vessels  upon  Lake  Ontario,  with  a  capacity  of  twenty- 
five  to  forty  tons  each.  These  were  all  destroyed  when  Fort  Frontenac  was  aban- 
doned (168^).  —  Ed, 


396  Some  New  Voyages 

charge  of  about  ten  thoufand  Crowns  for  fraight ;  and  I'm 
perfwaded,  that  upon  that  foot  the  Iroquefe  would  not  be  fuch 
fools  as  to  carry  fo  much  as  one  Beaver  to  the  Englifli  Colon- 
ies, and  that  for  four  Reafons.  The  firft  is,  that,  whereas  they 
muft  tranfport  'em  fixty  or  eighty  Leagues  upon  their  backs 
to  New-York^  they  have  not  above  feven  or  eight  Leagues 
travelling  from  their  own  Villages,  to  the  banks  of  the  Lake 
of  Frontenac.  For  a  fecond  reafon,  'tis  manifeft  that  the  En- 
gli/h  can't  pofTibly  let  'em  have  their  Commodities  fo  cheap, 
without  being  confiderable  lofers,  and  that  thereupon  every 
Merchant  would  drop  that  fort  of  Trade.  The  third  is 
drawn  from  the  difficulty  of  having  Subfiftance  upon  the  Road 
between  the  Iroquefe  Villages  and  New-York  ;  for  the  Iroquefe 
go  thither  in  great  Bodies,  for  fear  of  being  furpris'd,  and  I 
acquainted  you  before  feveral  times,  that  there's  no  Venifon 
in  that  fide  of  the  Country.  The  fourth  reafon  is  this.  In 
marching  fo  far  from  their  Villages,  they  expofe  their  Wives, 
their  Children,  and  their  fuperannuated  Men,  for  a  prey  to 
their  Enemies,  who  upon  that  occafion  may  either  kill  'em,  or 
carry  'em  off;  and  of  this  we  have  two  Inftances  already. 
Over  and  above  the  cheapnefs  of  our  Commodities,  'twould 
likewife  be  requifite  that  we  made  'em  Prefents  every  year, 
and  at  the  fame  time  intreated  'em  not  to  difturb  the  repofe 
of  our  [272]  Confederate  Savages,  who  are  fuch  fools,  as  to 
wage  War  one  with  another,  inftead  of  entring  into  a  joint 
League  in  oppofition  to  the  Iroquefe,  the  moft  redoubted  of 
their  Enemies,  and  thofe  whom  they  have  moft  reafon  to  fear. 
In  a  word,  if  we  would  manage  our  affairs  with  the  Iroquefe  to 


to  iVor^/^-America.  397 

the  beft  advantage,  we  ought  to  put  in  execution  that  Projed 
that  I  mention'd  in  my  23^  Letter. 

To  alledge  that  thefe  Barbarians  have  a  dependance  upon 
the  Englifhy  is  a  foolifh  Plea :  For  they  are  fo  far  from  owning 
any  dependance,  that  when  they  go  to  New-Tork  to  truck 
their  Skins,  they  have  the  confidence  to  put  rates  upon  the 
Goods  they  have  occafion  for,  when  the  Merchants  offer  to 
raife  their  price.  I  have  intimated  already  feveral  times,  that 
their  refped  for  the  Engli/h,  is  tack'd  to  the  occafion  they 
have  to  make  ufe  of  'em ;  that  this  is  the  only  motive  which 
induces  'em  to  treat  the  Engli/h  as  their  Brethren,  and  their 
Friends ;  and  that  if  the  French  would  fell  'em  the  Neceffaries 
of  Life,  as  well  as  Arms  and  Ammunition,  at  easfier  rates, 
they  would  not  make  many  journeys  to  the  Engli/h  Colonies. 
This  is  a  confideration  that  ought  to  be  chiefly  in  our  view ; 
for  if  we  minded  it  to  the  purpofe,  they  would  be  cautious 
of  infulting  our  Savage  Confederates,  as  well  as  our  felves. 
The  Governours  General  of  Canada  would  do  well  to  imploy 
the  fenfible  Men  of  the  Country  that  are  acquainted  with  our 
Confederates,  in  prefixing  'em  to  live  in  a  good  correfpondence 
with  one  another,  without  waging  War  among  themfelves  ;  for 
moft  of  the  Southern  Nations  worm  out  one  another  infenfi- 
bly,  which  affords  matter  of  joy  to  the  Iroquefe.  Now,  'twere 
an  eafie  matter  to  prevent  this  fatal  mouldering,  by  threatning 
to  give  'em  no  further  fupplies  of  Commodities  in  their  Vil- 
lages. To  this  precaution,  we  ought  to  add  that  of  indeav- 
ouring  to  ingage  two  or  three  Nations  to  live  together;  [273] 
the  Oiitaouas,  for  inftance,  with  the  Hurons;  the  Sakis  with  the 


398  Some  Neiv  Voyages 

Pouteonatamis,  alias  Ptiants}  If  all  thofe  Nations  who  are 
imbarqued  in  a  Confederacy  with  us,  would  but  agree  one 
with  another,  and  put  up  their  quarrels,  they  would  give 
themfelves  wholly  to  the  hunting  of  Beavers,  which  would  tend 
to  the  inlarging  of  our  Commerce ;  and  befides,  they  would 
be  in  a  condition  of  making  one  joint  Body,  when  the  Iroquefe 
offer'd  to  attack  either  one  or  t'other. 

'Tis  the  intereft  of  the  Englijh  to  perfwade  thefe  Nations, 
that  the  French  have  nothing  lefs  in  view,  than  to  deftroy 
them  as  foon  as  they  meet  with  an  opportunity;  that  the 
growing  populoufnefs  of  Canada^  is  a  fufficient  ground  of 
alarm ;  that  they  ought  to  avoid  all  Commerce  v/ith  the 
French y  for  fear  of  being  betray'd  in  any  way  whatfoever; 
that  to  hinder  the  repairing  of  Fort  Frontenac,  and  the  re- 
building of  Barques  for  that  Lake,  is  to  them  a  thing  of  the 
laft  Importance,  by  reafon  that  the  French  might  in  four  and 
twenty  hours,  make  a  Defcent  from  thence  to  their  Villages, 
and  carry  off  their  ancient  Men,  their  Women  and  their 
Children,  at  a  time  when  the  Warriours  might  be  ingag'd  in 
the  hunting  of  Beavers ;  That  they  would  promote  their  own 
interefl:  by  waging  War  with  the  French  from  time  to  time,  by 
ravaging  the  Seignories  and  Settlements  in  the  upper  part  of 
the  Country,  in  order  to  obhge  the  Inhabitants  to  abdicate 
the  Colony,  and  to  difcourage  thofe  who  would  otherwife 
remove  out  of  France,   and   fettle   in   Canada;    and    in   fine. 


^  Lahontan  here  confuses  two  entirely  different,  though  neighbouring,  Wisconsin 
tribes  ;  the  Potawatomi  were  of  Algonquian,  the  Puants  (Winnebago)  of  Siouan 
stocit.  —  Ed. 


to  A^o/tZ'-America.  399 

That  in  time  of  Peace  'twould  be  very  proper  to  ftop  the 
Coureurs  de  Bois  at  the  Catarads  of  the  Outaouas  River,  and  to 
feize  the  Arms  and  Ammunition  that  they  carry  to  the  Sav- 
ages upon  the  Lakes. 

Farther,  if  the  Englifh  would  purfue  their  meafures  to  the 
beft  advantage,  they  ought  to  ingage  the  Tjonontoiiam  or  the 
Goyoguans  to  go  and  fettle  upon  the  Banks  of  the  Lake  Erri^y 
near  the  Mouth  [274]  of  the  River  of  Condi  ;  and  at  the  fame 
time  they  ought  to  build  a  Fort  there,  with  fome  long 
Barques  or  Brigantines :  For  this  is  the  moft  convenient  and 
advantageous  Poft  of  all  that  Country,  and  that  for  an  infinity 
of  Reafons  which  I  am  oblig'd  to  conceal.  Befides  this  Fort, 
they  fhould  build  another  at  the  Mouth  of  the  River  des 
Frangois ;  and  then  'twould  be  abfolutely  impoffible  for  the 
Coureurs  de  Bois  to  reach  the  Lakes. 

They  ought  likewife  to  ingage  the  Savages  of  Acadia  in 
their  intereft  ;  which  they  may  do  with  little  charge.  The 
Planters  of  New-England  fhould  mind  this,  as  well  as  the  for- 
tifying of  the  Ports  in  which  they  fifh  their  Cod.  As  for  the 
fitting  out  of  Fleets  to  deftroy  the  Colony,  I  would  not  advife 
the  Englifh  to  give  themfelves  that  trouble;  for  fuppofing 
they  were  affur'd  of  Succefs,  'tis  but  fome  places  that  can  be 
reckon'd  worth  the  while. 

To  conclude ;  I  muft  fay  the  Englifh  in  thefe  Colonies  are 
too  carelefs  and  lazy :  The  French  Coureurs  de  Bois,  are  much 
readier  for  Enterprifes,  and  the  Canadefe  are  certainly  more 
vigilant  and  more  a6live.  It  behoves  the  Inhabitants  of  New- 
York  to  inlarge  their  Fur-trade  by  well  concerted  Enterprifes  ; 


400  Some  New  Voyages 

and  thofe  of  New-England^  to  render  the  Cod-fifhing  more 
beneficial  to  the  Colony,  by  taking  fuch  meafures  as  many 
other  People  would,  if  they  were  as  advangeoufly  feated.  I 
do  not  intend  to  fpeak  of  the  limits  of  New-France^  and  New- 
England^  for  they  were  never  well  adjufted  ;  though  indeed 
'twould  feem  that  in  feveral  Treaties  of  Peace  between  thefe 
two  Kingdoms,  the  Boundaries  were  in  a  manner  mark'd  out 
in  fome  places.  Whatever  is  in  that  matter^  the  decifion  of  it 
is  too  nice  a  point  for  one  that  can't  open  his  mind  without 
pulHng  an  old  Houfe  upon  his  Head. 

The  End  of  the  Firft,  Volume. 


[275]   A  TABLE  explaining  fome  Terms  made 
ufe  of  in  both  Volumes. 

A. 

ASTROLABE  is  a  Mathematical  Injlrument  that  can  fcarce 
be  tifed  in  the  Ocean  by  reafon  of  the  Weaves.  There  are 
two  forts  of  them.  The  firfl  are  made  ufe  of  by  Eaft-India 
Mafiers,  at  a  time  when  the  Sea  is  as  fmooth  as  the  face  of  a 
Looking-glafs.  This  fort  are  ferviceable  in  taking  the  heighth 
of  the  Sun^  by  the  means  of  two  little  PinSy  which  are  bor^d  fo  as 
to  have  two  dioptrick  Perforations ^  that  ferve  to  condu^l  the  rays 
of  light  to  that  Luminary.  The  latter  are  fuch  as  the  Mathe- 
maticiam  commonly  make  ufe  of  for  Aftronomical  Obfervations, 
and  are  furbifli'd  with  Azimuths^  Almucantara's,  Loxodromick 
Tables^  and  the  Concentrick  and  Excentrick  Tables  of  the  Sphere. 

B. 

Bank  of  New-found-land,  or  Bank  in  general,  is  a  rifing  Ground 
in  the  Sea,  which  /hoots  like  a  Hat  beyond  the  other  brims.  The 
Bank  of  New-found-land  has  thirty  or  forty  Fathom  Water, 
and  is  pav'd  with  Cod  fifh. 

Bafin,  is  a  head  of  fiagnating  Water,  not  unlike  a  Pool  or  Lake. 

Bouteux  fignifies  little  Nets  belag'd  to  the  end  of  a  Stick.  The 
Fifhermen  make  ufe  of  them  to  catch  Fifh  upon  a  fandy  Ground, 
and  efpecially  Eels,  upon  the  fide  of  St.  Laurence  River. 

26 


402  A   TABLE. 

Bouts  de  Quievres,  are  Nets  not  unlike  Bouteux,  which  f^rve  for 
the  fame  ufe. 

Breaking  ground  fignifies  the  weighing  Anchor  and  putting  to  Sea. 

Brigantlne,  a  fmall  Feffel  one  Deck,  built  of  light  [276]  JVood, 
which  plies  both  with  Oars  and  Sails.  'Tis  equally  fharp  at 
Prow  and  Poop,  and  is  built  for  a  quick  Sailer. 

C. 

Calumet  in  general  fignifies  a  Pipe,  being  a  Norman  Word,  deriv'd 
from  Chalumeau.  The  Savages  do  not  underfiand  this  Word, 
for  'twas  introduc'd  to  Canada  by  the  Normans  when  they  firfl 
fettled  there;  and  has  ftill  continued  in  ufe  amongfi  the  French 
Planters.^  The  Calumet  or  Pipe  is  call'd  in  the  Iroquefe  Lan- 
guage Ganondaoe,  and  by  the  other  Savage  Nations  Poagan. 

Canadefe  or  Canadans,  are  the  Natives  of  Czn^da.  fprung  from  a 
French  Father  and  Mother.  In  the  Iflands  of  South-America 
the  Natives  born  of  French  Parents  are  called  Creoles. 

Capa  y  d'efpada,  A  Gafcogne  Title  which  the  People  of  that 
Province  gave  in  former  times  by  way  of  Irony,  to  the  Members  of 
the  fupreme  Council  0/ Canada,  becaufe  the  fir fi  Counfellors  wore 
neither  Robe  nor  Sword,  but  walk'd  very  gravely  with  a  Cane 
in  their  Hands,  both  in  the  City  of  Quebeck,  and  in  the  Hall. 

Ca({e-tete  fignifies  a  Club,  or  a  Head-breaker.^  The  Savages  call 
it  Affan  Ouftick,  Ouftick  fignifying  the  Head,  and  Affan,  to 
break. 


^  Strictly  speaking,  the  word  calumet  (chalumeau)  referred  only  to  the  reed  or 
stem  of  the  pipe.  —  Ed. 

2  The  word  casse-tete  is  usually  rendered  by  the  Indian  term  tomahawk,  although 
more  properly  a  war-club  than  a  hatchet.  —  Ed. 


A   TABLE.  403 

Channel  is  a  /pace  of  pretty  deep  Water  between  two  Banks ^  or 
between  two  Shoars.  Commonly  the  Channels  are  inclofed  by 
Flats ^  and  for  that  reafon  Bouys  or  Mafls  are  fixt  upon  'dw,  in 
order  to  direct  the  Pilots^  who  fleer  either  by  thefe  Marks,  or  by 
founding,  for  they  would  run  the  rifque  of  loofing  their  Ships,  if 
they  did  not  keep  exactly  to  the  Channel. 

Coaft  along,  fee  Sweep. 

Compafs  of  Variation.  'Tis  larger  than  the  ordinary  Compaffes, 
and  ferves  to  point  out  the  in  equal  Motions  of  the  Needle,  which 
leans  always  to  the  North-Eafl  in  the  other  Hemifphere,  whereas 
it  flill  plies  to  the  North-TFefi;  in  this,  I  mean  on  this  fide  the 
Equinoctial  line:  The  [277]  Needle  touch' d  with  the  Loadflone 
departs  from  the  true  North  a  certain  number  of  Degrees  to  the 
right  and  left;  and  Mariners  compute  the  Degrees  of  its  depart- 
ure by  the  means  of  an  Alhidada,  and  a  thread  which  divides  the 
Glafs  of  the  Compafs  into  two  equal  parts,  and  fo  fliews  the 
Variation  of  the  Needle  at  Sun-fet,  that  being  the  true  proper 
time  for  making  the  Obfervation  ;  for  at  Sun-rifing,  and  at  Noon, 
one  may  be  deceived  by  RefraSlions,  &c. 

Coureurs  de  Bois,  i.  e.  Forefl  Rangers,  are  French  or  Canadefe, 
fo  call'd  from  employing  their  whole  Life  in  the  rough  Exercife 
of  tranfporting  Merchandize  Goods  to  the  Lakes  of  Canada,  and 
to  all  the  other  Countries  of  that  Continent,  in  order  to  Trade 
with  the  Savages :  And  in  regard  that  they  run  in  Canows  a 
tboufand  Leagues  up  the  Country,  notwithflanding  the  danger 
of  the  Sea  and  Enemies,  I  take  it,  they  fhould  rather  be  called 
Coureurs  de  Rifques,  than  Coureurs  de  Bois. 


404  A   TABLE. 

E. 

Eddy,  or  boyling  Water^  is  little  Watery  Mountains  that  rife  at  the 
■foot  of  Water- falls  or  Catara^s,  jufl  as  we  fee  the  Water  plays 
in  the  Cifierns  of  Water-works. 

Edge  0/  ^  Bank,  is  the  fhelving  part  of  it  that  runs  fleep  like  a  Wall. 

F. 

Fathom,  among  the  French  is  the  meafure  of  fix  foot. 

Feaft  of  Union,  a  Term  us^d  by  the  Iroquefe  to  fignify  the  renew- 
ing of  the  Alliance  between  the  five  Iroquefe  Nations. 

Flats  are  a  ridge  of  Rocks  running  under  Water  from  one  Station 
to  another,  and  rifiing  within  five  or  fix  foot  at  leaft  of  the  Surface 
of  that  Element,  fo  as  to  hinder  Ships,  Barques,  &c.  to  float 
upon  'em. 

F might,  fiignifies  in  this  Book  the  Cargo,  tho'  in  other  Cafes  itfigni- 
fies  likewife  the  Hire  or  Fare. 

Furl  the  Sails,  fignifies  the  drawing  them  up  to  a  heap  [278] 
towards  the  Top-maft,  not  long  ways  as  we  do  the  Curtains  of  a 
Bed,  but  from  below  upwards.  This  is  done  by  two  Ropes,  that 
draw  up  the  Sail  as  a  String  does  a  Purfe. 

H. 
Head-Bars  are  two  round  pieces  of  Wood,  reaching  on  each  fide  from 
one  end  of  a  Canow  to  the  other.     Thefe  are  the  Supporters  of 
the  Canow,  for  the  Ribs  and  Spars  are  made  f aft  upon  them. 

K. 

Keel  of  a  Ship,  is  a  long  piece  of  the  ftrongeft  Wood,  or  at  leaft  feveral 
pieces  joyn'd  together,  to  bear  the  great  weight  of  all  the  other 
Timber. 


A  TABLE.  405 

Kitchi  Okima,  is  the  general  Name  for  the  Governoiir  General  of 
Canada  among  all  the  Savages,  whofe  Languages  approach  to 
that  of  the  Algonkins.  Kitchi  fignifies  Great,  and  Okima, 
Captain.  The  Iroquefe  and  Hurons  call  the  Governor  Gen- 
eral Onnontio. 

L. 

Latitude.  Every  Body  knows  that  it  imports  the  Elevation  of  the 
Pole,  or  the  dijlance  from  a  fix'd  Point  of  the  ^Equator. 

Land-carriage  fignifies  the  tranfporting  of  Canows  by  Land  from 
the  Foot  to  the  Head  of  a  Cataract,  or  from  one  River  to 
another. 

Light  Ships  are  fuch  as  are  empty,  without  any  Cargo. 

P. 
Poop  is  the  Stern  or  After-part  of  the  Ship  in  which  the  Rudder 

is  fix^d. 
Precipice  of  a  Bank,  fee  Edge. 
Prow  is  the  Head  or  Fore-part  of  a  Ship,  which  cuts  the  Water  firfl. 

Q. 
Quarter.  Tho^  the  Word  Quarter  in  a  Maritime  Senfe,  is  not  well 
explain'd;  I  put  the  meaning  of  it  to  be  this.  [279]  The  North 
Quarter  comprehends  the  fpace  that  lies  between  North-Wefl  and 
North-Eafl.  The  Eafl  Quarter  runs  from  North-Eafl  to 
South-Eafl.  The  South  Quarter  comprehends  that  part  of  the 
Heavens  that  falls  between  South-Eafl  and  South-Wefl:  And 
the  Wefl  Quarter  extends  from  South-Wefl  to  North-Wefl. 


4o6  A   TABLE.  . 

R. 

Refitting  of  a  Ship^  fignifies  the  repairing  and  drejjing  of  it,  and 
putting  it  into  a  Condition  to  fail,  by  putting  in  new  Planks, 
caulking  the  Seams,  &c. 

Ribs  of  a  Canow,  are  much  like  thofe  of  a  Pink,  only  there's  this 
difference,  that  they  line  the  Canow  only  on  the  in-fide  from  one 
Head  Bar  to  another,  upon  which  they  are  inchas'd.  They  have 
the  thicknefs  of  three  Crowns,  and  the  breadth  of  four  Inches. 

Ruche,  an  Inflrument  for  fifhing,  refembling  a  Bee-hive. 

S. 

Scurvy,  is  a  Corruption  of  the  Mafs  of  Blood.  There  are  two  forts  of 
it;  one  call'd  the  Land  Scurvy,  which  loads  a  Man  with  Infir- 
mities that  gradually  bring  him  to  his  Grave;  the  other  is  the  Sea 
Scurvy,  which  infallibly  kills  a  Man  in  8  days  unlefs  he  gets  a-flioar. 

Shieve,  i.  e.  Row  the  wrong  way,  in  order  to  affifl  the  Steerfman  to 
fleer  the  Boat,  and  to  keep  the  Boat  in  the  Channel. 

Shoot.  To  jhoot  a  Water-fall  or  Cataract,  implies  the  running  a 
Boat  down  thefe  dangerous  Precipices,  following  the  flream  of 
the  Water,  and  fleering  very  nicely. 

Sledges  are  a  Conveniency  for  travelling,  built  in  an  oblong  quad- 
rangular form,  upon  two  pieces  of  Wood,  which  are  4  foot  long, 
and  6  foot  broad ;  upon  the  Wood  there  are  feveral  pieces  of 
Cloath  or  Hide  nail'd  to  keep  the  Wind  off.  Thefe  two  pieces 
of  Wood  are  very  hard,  and  well  fmooth'd,  that  they  may  flide 
the  better  on  Snow  or  Ice.  Such  are  the  Horfe  Sledges.  But 
thofe  drawn  by  Dogs  are  open,  and  made  of  two  little  pieces  of 
bard  fmooth,  and  fhining  Wood,  which  are  half  an  Inch  thick, 
5  foot  long,  and  a  foot  and  a  half  broad. 


A   TABLE.  407 

[280]  Spars  are  little  pieces  of  Cedar  }Food,  of  the  thicknefs  of  a 
Crown,  and  the  breadth  of  3  Inches,  and  as  long  as  they  can  be, 
made.    They  do  the  fame  Service  to  a  Canow,  that  a  good  lining 
does  to  a  Coat. 

Stand  in  for  Land,  ftgnifies  to  fail  directly  towards  it. 

Steer  a  Ship,  imports  the  managing  of  a  Ship  by  the  means  of  a 
Rudder,  (as  we  do  a  Horfe  with  a  Bridle)  when  there^s  Wind 
enough  to  work  her ;  but  if  there  be  no  Wind,  a  Ship  is  more 
unmoveable  than  a  Gouty  Perfon  in  an  Elbow  Chair. 

Stem  a  Tide  or  the  Current  of  a  River,  i.  e.  to  fail  againfl  the  Current, 
or  to  fleer  for  the  place  from  whence  the  Tides  or  Currents  come. 

Strike,  to  flrike  the  Sails  or  Flag  fignifies  the  lowering  of  'em, 
whether  it  be  to  fubmit  to  an  Enemy,  or  by  reafon  of  high  Winds. 

Sweep  a  Coafi,  ftgnifies  to  fail  along  the  Coafl  fide  at  a  reafonable 

diflance. 

T. 

Top-gallant-Mafts  are  two  little  Mafls  fet  upon  the  two  Top- 
Mafts,  and  have  two  Sails  fitted  for  'em. 

Top-Sails  are  two  Sails  fitted  for  the  two  Top-Mafis,  which  fland 
dire£lly  above  the  two  great  Mafts. 

Traverfe.  To  tr av erf e  fignifies  failing  Zigzag,  or  from  fide  to  fide 
as  a  drunken  Man  reels,  when  the  Wind  is  contrary,  for  then 
they  are  obliged  to  tack  fometimes  to  the  right,  and  fometimes  to 
the  left,  keeping  as  near  to  the  Wind  as  they  can,  in  order  to 
make  what  way  they  can,  or  at  leaft  to  prevent  their  lofing  Ground. 

Tree  of  Peace,  a  Symbolick  Metaphor  for  Peace  itfelf. 

[End  of  Volume  I.] 


UNIVERSITY  OF  ILLINOIS-UflSANA 


lllill  III 

3  0112  002226675 



=== VOLUME II (archive.org: newvoyagestonort02laho) ===
1  I  B  RAFLY 

OF   THE 

U  N  I  VLR.SITY 

Of    ILLINOIS 

Ll3nE 

\905 


111.  HIST.  SUKVEV 


LAHONTAN'S 
NEW  VOYAGES  TO  NORTH-AMERICA 

EDITED  BY 
REUBEN  GOLD  THWAITES,  LL.D. 

Volume  II 


-xirl . II .  little  &u&        x  _ 


NEW  VOYAGES 

TO 

NORTH-AMERICA 

BY  THE 

BARON  de  LAHONTAN 

Reprinted  from  the  English  edition  of  1703,  with  facsimiles  of 

original  title-pages,  maps,  and  illustrations,  and  the 

addition  of  Introduction,  Notes,  and  Index 

By  Reuben  Gold  Thwaites,  LL.D. 

Editor  of  "The  Jesuit  Relations  and  Allied  Documents"  Hennepin's 
"New  Discovery,"  etc. 


3n  Ctoo  Volumes 

Volume  II 


CHICAGO 

A.  C.  McCLURG  &  CO. 

1905 


Copyright 

A.  C.  McCLURG  &  CO. 
1 905 

Published  February  25,  1905 


Composition  by  The  Dial  Pre*,  Chicago. 
Press-work  by  The  University  Press,  Cambridge. 


CONTENTS  — VOLUME  II 


PAGE 


Lahontan's  "New  Voyages  to  North-America"— 
Volume  II. 
Title-page  (facsimile  of  original)         ....  409 

Discourses  — 

Of  the  Habit,  Houfes,  Complexion  and  Tempera- 
ment of  the  Savages  of  North-America    .        .411 
Of  the  Humours  and  Cuftoms  of  the  Savages        .  420 
The  Belief  of  the  Savages,  and  the  Obftacles  of 

their  Converfion 434 

The  way  of  Worfhip,  ufed  by  the  Savages  .  .  446 
Of  the  Amours  and  Marriages  of  the  Savages  .  451 
Of  the  Difeafes  and  Remedies  of  the  Savages  .  465 
The  Diverfions  of  Hunting  and  Shooting  ufual 

among  the  Savages 476 

The  Military  Art  of  the  Savages  .  .  .  .495 
A  View  of  the  Heraldry,  or  the  Coats  of  Arms  of 

the  Savages 510 

An  Explication  of  the  Savage  Hieroglyphicks       .512 
A  Conference  or  Dialogue  between  the  Author  and 
Adario,  a  Noted  Man  among  the  Savages,  Con- 
taining a  Circumftantial  View  of  the  Cuftoms  and 
Humours  of  that  People 517 


vi  Contents 

PAGE 

An  Appendix,  Containing  fome  New  Voyages  to 
Portugal  and  Denmark ;  after  the  Author's  Retire- 
ment from  Canada : 

Letters  I  (Lisbon,  April  20,  1694)  -VII  (Sara- 
goza,  October  8,  1695)         ....  619 
A  Short  Dictionary  of  the  moft  Univerfal  Language 

of  the  Savages 732 

Index — The  Editor 751 


ILLUSTRATIONS— VOLUME  II 


(facsimiles  of  originals) 

Figure  of  Indian  in  an  Oval       . 

"  A  Village  of  the   Savages   of  Canada "  ;   with 

figures  of  men  and  children  . 
Diagram  showing  "The  way  of  Worfhip  " 
Sketches  illustrating  "Amours  and  Marriages" 
Sketches  illustrating  remedies,  death,  and  burial 
"  A  Beaver  Pool,"  and  methods  of  hunting  beavers 
A  beaver  hunt  . 
"  The  Military  Art  "  (a)    . 
"The  Military  Art"  (b)   . 
"  Coats  of  Arms  " 
"  Hieroglyphick  Symbols" 


PAGE 

Frontispiece 

Facing  430 
464 
492 

524 
556 
588 
622 
654 
686 
720 


NEW 

VOYAGES 

TO 

North-America. 

Giving  a  full  Account  of  the  Cuftoms, 
Commerce,*  Religion,  and  ftrange  O 
pinions  of  the  Savages  of  that  Country. 

with 
Political  Remarks  upon  the  Courts 
of  Portugal  and  DemnarJcy   and  the  Prcfent 
State  of  the  Commerce  of  thofe  Countries. 


Never  Printed  before. 


WRITTEN 

By  the  Baron  L  a  h  o  n  t  a  n  ,  Lord 
Lieutenant  of  the  French  Colony  at 
Placentia'in  Newfoundland :  Now  in 
England, 


VOL.  II 


LONDON: 

Pr"£te£/9r  H  ********  *n  St.  Paul's  Church-yard  ;  T.   Goodwin 
M.  Wotton,  B.  Took  in  Fketjlreet;  and   S.  M^ibipin  Corvktl 

170?.  ' 


[i]    A 

DISCOURSE 

OF    THE 

Habit,  Houfes,  Complexion  and 
Temperament 

OF  THE 

SAVAGES 

OF 

NORTH-AMERICA. 


THE  Grecian  Chronologers  who  divided  the  courfe  of 
Time  into  three  Periods,  namely  the  aS-qXov,  or  that 
which  is  wrapt  up  in  Obfcurity,  the  fiv6ixbv,  alias  yfaixov,  or 
that  which  was  the  feafon  of  Fiction  and  Fables,  and  the 
isoctxov  which  affords  us  true  and  creditable  Actions :  Thefe 
Chronologers,  I  fay,  might  have  fav'd  themfelves  the  trouble 
of  writing  a  Thoufand  idle  Stories  relating  to  the  Original 
of  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Earth ;  for  the  invention  of 
Writing  being  unknown  to  them  before  the  Siege  of  Troyy 
they  had  no  other  Standard  to  confult  [2]  but  the  Fabulous 
Manufcripts  of  the  Egyptians  and  Chaldeans,  who  were  a 
Phanatick  Superftitious  fort  of  People.     But  fuppofing  the 


4i2  Some  New  Voyages 

Egyptians  and  Chaldeans  to  have  invented  the  Art  of  Writing, 
what  Credit  can  we  give  to  the  accounts  of  things  that  are 
faid  to  have  happen'd  before  the  date  of  that  Invention?  In 
all  probability  they  knew  no  more  of  the  matter  than  the 
Americans,  and  upon  that  fcore  'twas  very  hard  for  them  to 
give  a  faithful  Narrative  of  the  Adventures  and  Exploits  of 
their  Anceftors.  I  am  now  fully  convinc'd  that  Tradition  is 
fo  inconftant,  obfcure,  uncertain  and  fallacious,  that  we  cann't 
pretend  to  rely  upon  it.  And  this  Notion  I  owe  to  the  Sav- 
ages of  Canada,  who  being  at  a  lofs  to  trace  the  truth  of  what 
has  been  tranfacled  in  their  own  Country  but  200  Years  ago, 
gave  me  occafion  to  call  in  Queftion  the  Purity  and  Truth  of 
Tradition.  Upon  this  lay  you  may  eafily  apprehend,  that 
thefe  poor  People  are  as  little  acquainted  with  their  own 
Hiftory  and  Origin,  as  the  Greeks  and  Chaldeans  were  with 
theirs.  Let  us  therefore  content  our  felves,  my  good  Friend,  in 
believing  that  they  are  defcended  of  honeft  old  Adam,  as  well 
as  you  and  I. 

I  have  read  fome  Hiftories  of  Canada,  which  were  writ  at 
feveral  times  by  the  Monks,  and  muft  own  that  they  have 
given  fome  plain  and  exacT:  Defcriptions  of  fuch  Countries  as 
they  knew ;  but  at  the  fame  time  they  are  widely  miftaken  in 
their  Accounts  of  the  Manners  and  Cuftoms  of  the  Savages.1 


!The  "monkish  histories"  of  Canada  which  Lahontan  had  probably  seen, 
were  :  Jesuit  Relations,  of  which  forty  volumes  had  been  published  yearly  in  Paris 
from  1632-73;  Du  Creux,  Historic  Canadensis  seu  Nova-Francia  (Paris,  1664), 
largely  composed  from  the  Relations  ;  and  Thevenot,  Receuil  des  Voyages  Curieux 
(Paris,  1681),  containing  Marquette's  account  of  his  discoveries.  The  Recollect 
historians  were  Sagard-Theodat,  Histoire  du  Canada   et  -voyages  que  les  freres 


to  North- America.  413 

The  Recollets  brand  the  Savages  for  ftupid,  grofs  and  ruftick 
Perfons,  uncapable  of  Thought  or  Reflection :  But  the  Jefuits 
give  them  other  fort  of  Language,  for  they  intitle  them  to 
good  Senfe,  to  a  tenacious  Memory,  and  to  a  quick  Appre- 
henfion  feafon'd  [3]  with  a  folid  Judgment.  The  former 
allege  that  'tis  to  no  purpofe  to  preach  the  Gofpel  to  a  fort  of 
People  that  have  lefs  Knowledge  than  the  Brutes.1  On  the 
other  hand  the  latter  (I  mean  the  Jefuits)  give  it  out,  that 
thefe  Savages  take  Pleafure  in  hearing  the  Word  of  God,  and 
readily  apprehend  the  meaning  of  the  Scriptures.  In  the 
mean  time,  'tis  no  difficult  matter  to  point  to  the  Reafons 
that  influence  the  one  and  the  other  to  fuch  Allegations ;  the 
Myftery  is  eafily  unravell'd  by  thofe  who  know  that  thefe  two 
Orders  cannot  fet  their  Horfes  together  in  Canada.2 

I  have  feen  fo  many  impertinent  Accounts  of  this  Coun- 
try, and  thofe  written  by  Authors  that  pafs'd  for  Saints ;  that 
I  now  begin  to  believe,  that  all  Hiftory  is  one  continued 

mineurs  Recollets  y  ont  faicts  (1636)  ;  Le  Clercq,  Premier  etablissement  de  la  foy 
dans  la  Nowvelle  France  (Paris,  1691);  Hennepin,  Description  de  la  Louisiane 
(Paris,  1683);  New  Discovery  (London,  1698).  —  Ed. 

1  See  Thwaites  (ed.) ,  Hennepin's  Nenu  Discovery,  p.  466,  for  an  example  of  this 
allegation  of  the  Recollects.  — Ed. 

2  The  rivalry  between  the  two  orders  was  nearly  co-extensive  with  the  history  of 
New  France,  where  the  Recollects  were  first  upon  the  field,  but  after  1632  were  sup- 
planted by  the  Jesuits.  Talon  re-introduced  the  Recollects  to  Canada  in  1670,  that 
they  might  act  as  a  foil  to  the  Jesuits.  The  former  were  supported  by  Frontenac  and 
the  governor's  party  in  the  colony,  and  accompanied  La  Salle  upon  his  explorations. 
Lahontan  means  to  intimate  that  the  difference  in  the  attitude  of  the  two  orders 
towards  the  savages,  rested  upon  the  varying  success  of  their  respective  missions  — 
those  of  the  Jesuits  being  large  and  flourishing,  of  the  Recollects  few  and  languish- 
ing. —  Ed. 


414  Some  New  Voyages 

Series  of  Pyrrhonifm.1  Had  I  been  unacquainted  with  the 
Language  of  the  Savages,  I  might  have  credited  all  that  was 
faid  of  them ;  but  the  opportunity  I  had  of  Converfing  with 
that  People,  ferv'd  to  undeceive  me,  and  gave  me  to  under- 
ftand,  that  the  Recollets  and  the  Jefuits  content  themfelves 
with  glancing  at  things,  without  taking  notice  of  the  (almoft) 
invincible  Averfion  of  the  Savages  to  the  Truths  of  Chrif- 
tianity.  Both  the  one  and  the  other  had  good  reafon  to  be 
cautious  of  touching  upon  that  String.  In  the  mean  time 
naffer  me  to  acquaint  you,  that  upon  this  Head  I  only  fpeak 
of  the  Savages  of  Canada,  excluding  thofe  that  live  beyond 
the  River  of  Miflifipi,  of  whofe  Manners  and  Cuftoms  I  could 
not  acquire  a  perfect  Scheme,  by  reafon  that  I  was  unac- 
quainted with  their  Languages,  not  to  mention  that  I  had  not 
time  to  make  any  long  flay  in  their  Country.  In  the  Journal 
of  my  Voyage  upon  the  long  River,  I  acquainted  you  that 
they  are  a  very  polite  People,  which  you  [4]  will  likewife  infer 
from  the  Circumftances  mention'd  in  that  Difcourfe. 

Thofe  who  have  reprefented  the  Savages  to  be  as  rough  as 
Bears,  never  had  the  opportunity  of  feeing  them ;  for  they 
have  neither  Beard  nor  Hair  in  any  part  of  their  Body,  not  fo 
much  as  under  their  Arm-pits.2  This  is  true  of  both  Sexes, 
if  I  may  credit  thofe  who  ought   to  know   better  than   I. 


1  Pyrrho  was  a  Greek  philosopher,  founder  of  the  school  of  absolute  skepti- 
cism. —  Ed. 

2  The  Indians  are  not  altogether  beardless  ;  but,  disliking  the  custom  of  wearing 
hair  upon  the  face,  pluck  it  out  by  the  roots.  See  Jesuit  Relations,  i,  p.  281  ;  ii, 
p.  23,  where  Membertou,  the  Acadian  chief,  is  spoken  of  as  being  bearded  like  a 
Frenchman.  —  Ed. 


to  North- America.  415 

Generally  they  are  proper  well  made  Perfons,  and  fitter  Com- 
panions to  American  than  to  European  Women.  The  Iroquefe 
are  of  a  larger  Stature,  and  withal  more  Valiant  and  Cunning 
than  the  other  Nations ;  but  at  the  fame  time  they  are  neither 
fo  Nimble  nor  fo  Dexterous  at  the  Exercifes  of  War  or 
Hunting,  which  they  never  go  about  but  in  great  Numbers. 
The  Illinefe,  the  Oumamis,  and  the  Outagamins ;  with  fome 
other  adjacent  Nations,  are  of  an  indifferent  fize,  and  run  like 
Greyhounds,  if  the  Comparifon  be  allowable.  The  Outaouas, 
and  moft  of  the  other  Savages  to  the  Northward,  (excepting 
the  Sauteurs  and  the  Cliftinos)  are  cowardly,  ugly,  and  ungainly 
Fellows ;  but  the  Hurons  are  a  brave,  active  and  daring 
People,  refembling  the  Iroquefe  in  their  Stature  and  Counte- 
nance. 

All  the  Savages  are  of  a  Sanguine  Conftitution,  inclining 
to  an  Olive  Colour,  and  generally  fpeaking  they  have  good 
Faces  and  proper  Perfons.  'Tis  a  great  rarity  to  find  any 
among  them  that  are  Lame,  Hunch-back'd,  One-ey'd,  Blind, 
or  Dumb.1  Their  Eyes  are  large  and  black  as  well  as  their 
Hair ;  their  Teeth  are  White  like  Ivory,  and  the  Breath  that 
fprings  from  their  Mouth  in  expiration  is  as  pure  as  the  Air 
that  they  fuck  in  in  Infpiration,  notwithstanding  they  eat  no 
Bread ;  which  fhews  that  we  are  miftaken  in  Europe,  in  fancy- 
ing that  the  eating  of  Meat  [5]  without  Bread  makes  one's 
breath  ftink.  They  are  neither  fo  ftrong  nor  fo  vigorous  as 
moft  of  the  French  are  in  raifing  of  Weights  with  their  Arms, 


1  On  immunity  from  disease  and  deformity,  consult  Jes.  Rel.,  iii,  p.  75. —  Ed. 


4i 6  Some  New  Voyages 

or  carrying  of  Burdens  on  their  Backs;  but  to  make  amends 
for  that,  they  are  indefatigable  and  inur'd  to  Hardfhips,  info- 
much  that  the  Inconveniences  of  Cold  or  Heat  have  no  im- 
preflion  upon  them ;  their  whole  time  being  fpent  in  the  way 
of  Exercife,  whether  in  running  up  and  down  at  Hunting  and 
Fifhing,  or  in  Dancing  and  playing  at  Foot-ball,  or  fuch  Games 
as  require  the  Motion  of  the  Legs. 

The  Women  are  of  an  indifferent  Stature,  and  as  handfom 
in  the  Face  as  you  can  well  imagine ;  but  then  they  are  fo  fat, 
unwieldy  and  ill-built,  that  they'l  fcarce  tempt  any  but  Savages. 
Their  Hair  is  rolled  up  behind  with  a  fort  of  Ribband,  and 
that  Roller  hangs  down  to  their  Girdle  ;  they  never  offer  to 
cut  their  Hair  during  the  whole  Courfe  of  their  Lives,  whereas 
the  Men  cut  theirs  every  Month.1  Twere  to  be  wifhed,  that 
the  fame  good  luck  which  led  them  to  the  obfervation  of  this, 
had  thrown  them  upon  the  other  Advices  of  St.  Paul.  They 
are  covered  from  the  Neck  to  under  the  Knee,  and  always  put 
their  Legs  a  crofs  when  they  fit.  The  Girls  do  the  fame  from 
their  Cradle;  if  the  Word  be  not  improper,  for  there  is  no 
fuch  thing  as  a  Cradle  among  the  Savages.  The  Mothers 
make  ufe  of  certain  little  Boards  fluffed  with  Cotton,  upon 
which  the  Children  lye  as  if  their  Backs  were  glued  to  them, 
being  fwaddled  in  Linnen,  and  kept  on  with  Swathbands  run 
through  the  fides  of  the  Boards.     To  thefe  Boards  they  tye 


1  On  the  various  fashions  of  hair-dressing  among  the  Indians,  see  Jes.  Rel., 
xliv,  pp.  285,  287.  A  woman's  hair  was  sometimes  cut  as  a  punishment  for  adul- 
tery. —  Ed. 


to  North" America.  417 

Strings,  by  which  they  hang  their  Children  upon  the  Branches 
of  Trees,  when  they  are  about  any  thing  in  the  Woods.1 

[6]  The  old  and  the  married  Men  have  a  piece  of  Stuff 
which  covers  them  behind,  and  reaches  half  way  down  their 
Thighs  before  ;  whereas  the  young  Men  are  ftark  naked  all 
over.  They  alledge  that  Nakednefs  is  no  infraction  upon  the 
Meafures  of  Decency,  any  otherwife  than  as  it  is  contrary  to 
the  Cuftom  of  the  Europeans,  and  condemn'd  by  the  Notion 
that  they  have  of  it.  However,  both  the  young  and  the  old 
hang  upon  their  Backs  in  a  carelefs  way  a  Covering  of  Hide 
or  of  Scarlet,  when  they  go  abroad  to  Walk  or  to  make  Vifits. 
They  have  likewife  a  fort  of  Cloaks  or  Coats  calculated  for 
the  Seafon,  when  they  go  a  Hunting  or  upon  Warlike  Expe- 
ditions, in  order  to  guard  off  the  Cold  in  Winter,  and  the 
Flies  in  Summer.  Upon  fuch  occafions  they  make  ufe  of  a 
fort  of  Caps  made  in  the  form  of  a  Hat,  and  Shooes  of  Elk 
or  Hart  Skins,  which  reach  up  to  their  mid-Leg.2 

Their  Villages  are  Fortified  with  double  Paliffadoes  of  very 
hard  Wood,  which  are  as  thick  as  one's  Thigh,  and  fifteen 
Foot  high,  with  little  Squares  about  the  middle  of  the 
Courtines.  Commonly  their  Huts  or  Cottages  are  Eighty 
Foot  long,  Twenty  five  or  Thirty  Foot  deep,  and  Twenty 
Foot  high.     They  are  cover'd  with  the  Bark  of  young  Elms ; 


1  For  a  good  description  of  these  Indian  cradles,  see  Thwaites  (ed.),  Early 
Western  Travels,  ii,  pp.  97,  98;  Masson,  Bourgeois  de  la  Compagnie  du  Nord- 
Ouest  (Quebec,  1890),  ii,  pp.  322,  323.  — Ed. 

2Le  Jeune  gives  in  Jes.  Rel.,  vii,  pp.  7-19,  a  good  description  of  the  various 
kinds  of  dress  among  the  Canadian  Indians  at  different  seasons  of  the  year.  —  Ed. 
27 


4i 8  Some  New  Voyages 

and  have  two  Alcoves,  one  on  the  right  Hand  and  the  other 
on  the  left,  being  a  Foot  high  and  nine  Foot  broad,  between 
which  they  make  their  Fires,  there  being  vents  made  in  the 
Roof  for  the  Smoak.  Upon  the  fides  of  the  two  Alcoves 
there  are  little  Clofets  or  Apartments  in  which  the  young 
Women  or  married  Perfons  lye  upon  little  Beds  rais'd  about 
a  Foot  from  the  Ground.  To  Conclude,  one  Hut  contains 
three  or  four  Families.1 

[7]  The  Savages  are  very  Healthy,  and  unacquainted  with 
an  infinity  of  Difeafes,  that  plague  the  Europeans,  fuch  as 
the  Palfey,  the  Dropfey,  the  Gout,  the  Phthifick,  the  Afthma,  the 
Gravel,  and  the  Stone  :  But  at  the  fame  time  they  are  liable 
to  the  Small-Pox,  and  to  Pleurifies.  If  a  Man  dies  at  the  Age 
of  Sixty  Years,  they  think  he  dies  young,  for  they  commonly 
live  to  Eighty  or  an  Hundred  ;  nay,  I  met  with  two  that  were 
turn'd  of  an  Hundred  feveral  Years.2  But  there  are  fome 
among  them  that  do  not  live  fo  long,  becaufe  they  voluntarily 
fhorten  their  Lives  by  poyfoning  themfelves,  as  I  fhall  fhew 


1  The  domestic  architecture  of  the  American  aborigines  varied  with  the  tribe  and 
their  habitat.  Lahontan  had  ranged  from  Newfoundland  to  Mackinac,  if  not  farther, 
and  it  is  a  question  which  of  the  many  classes  of  huts  he  had  seen  he  is  now  describ- 
ing. Probably  he  refers  to  those  of  the  Huron,  who  then  lived  in  settled  villages  both 
in  the  Mackinac  district  and  near  the  French  fort  on  Lake  St.  Clair.  See  Parkman, 
Jesuits  in  North  America,  pp.  xxvi-xxviii.  Upon  the  entire  subject  of  Indian  dwell- 
ings, consult  Morgan,  "  Houses  and  House-Life  of  American  Aborigines,"  United 
States  Geological  Survey,  Contributions  to  Ethnology,  1881. — Ed. 

2  Early  travellers  obtained  a  mistaken  notion  of  Indian  longevity.  Older  chiefs, 
like  many  old  men  among  the  whites,  took  pride  in  their  length  of  years  and 
delighted  in  enlarging  upon  the  facts.  Modern  observation  proves  that  savages  are 
the  victims  of  their  unsanitary  life,  and  are  subject  to  peculiar  hardships  and  vicissi- 
tudes, hence  die  rather  younger  than  white  men.  —  Ed. 


to  North- America.  419 

you  elfewhere.  In  this  Point  they  feem  to  join  iffue  with  Zeno 
and  the  Stoicks,  who  vindicate  Self-Mnrther;  and  from  thence 
I  conclude,  that  the  Americans  are  as  great  Fools  as  thefe 
great  Philofophers. 


420  Some  New  Voyages 


A  Jhort  View  of  the  Humors  and  Cufloms  of  the 
SAVAGES. 

THE  Savages  are  utter  Strangers  to  diftinctions  of  Prop- 
erty, for  what  belongs  to  one  is  equally  anothers.  If 
any  one  of  them  be  in  danger  at  the  Beaver  Hunting  the  reft 
fly  to  his  Afliftance  without  being  fo  much  as  ask'd.  If  his 
Fufee  burfts  they  are  ready  to  offer  him  their  own.  If  any  of 
his  Children  be  kill'd  or  taken  by  the  Enemy,  he  is  prefently 
furnim'd  with  as  many  Slaves  as  he  hath  occafion  for.  Money 
is  in  ufe  with  none  of  them  but  thofe  that  are  Chriftians,  who 
live  in  the  Suburbs  of  our  Towns.  The  others  will  not  touch 
or  fo  much  as  look  upon  Silver,  but  give  it  the  odious  Name 
of  the  French  Serpent.  They'l  tell  you  that  amongft  [8]  us 
the  People  Murther,  Plunder,  Defame,  and  betray  one 
another,  for  Money,  that  the  Husbands  make  Merchandize 
of  their  Wives,  and  the  Mothers  of  their  Daughters,  for 
the  Lucre  of  that  Metal.  They  think  it  unaccountable  that 
one  Man  fhould  have  more  than  another,  and  that  the  Rich 
mould  have  more  RefpecT:  than  the  Poor.  In  fhort,  they 
fay,  the  name  of  Savages  which  we  beftow  upon  them  would 
fit  our  felves  better,  fince  there  is  nothing  in  our  Actions  that 
bears  an  appearance  of  Wifdom.  Such  as  have  been  in  France 
were  continually  teazing  us  with  the   Faults  and   Diforders 


to  North- America.  421 

they  obferv'd  in  our  Towns,  as  being  occafion'd  by  Money. 
'Tis  in  vain  to  remonftrate  to  them  how  ufeful  the  Diftinclion 
of  Property  is  for  the  fupport  of  a  Society:  They  make  a  Jeft 
of  what's  to  be  faid  on  that  Head.  In  fine,  they  neither 
Quarrel  nor  Fight,  nor  Slander  one  another.  They  feoff  at 
Arts  and  Sciences,  and  laugh  at  the  difference  of  Degrees 
which  is  obferv'd  with  us.  They  brand  us  for  Slaves,  and  call 
us  miferable  Souls,  whofe  Life  is  not  worth  having,  alledging, 
That  we  degrade  our  felves  in  fubjecling  our  felves  to  one 
Man  who  poffeffes  the  whole  Power,  and  is  bound  by  no  Law 
but  his  own  Will;  That  we  have  continual  Jars  among  our 
felves ;  that  our  Children  rebel  againft  their  Parents ;  that  we 
Imprifon  one  another,  and  publickly  promote  our  own  De- 
ftrudion.  Befides,  they  value  themfelves  above  any  thing  that 
you  can  imagine,  and  this  is  the  reafon  they  always  give 
for't,  That  one's  as  much  Mafter  as  another,  andfince  Men  are  all 
made  of  the  fame  Clay  there  fJiould  be  no  Diflintlton  or  Superiority 
among  them.  They  pretend  that  their  contented  way  of 
Living  far  furpaffes  our  Riches ;  That  all  our  Siences  are  not 
fo  valuable  as  the  Art  of  leading  a  peaceful  calm  Life ;  [9] 
That  a  Man  is  not  a  Man  with  us  any  farther  than  Riches 
will  make  him;  but  among  them  the  true  Qualifications  of  a 
Man  are,  to  run  well,  to  hunt,  to  bend  the  Bow  and  manage 
the  Fuzee,  to  work  a  Cannoo,  to  underftand  War,  to  know 
Forrefts,  to  fubfift  upon  a  little,  to  build  Cottages,  to  fell 
Trees,  and  to  be  able  to  travel  an  hundred  Leagues  in  a 
Wood  without  any  Guide,  or  other  Provifion  than  his  Bow 
and  Arrows.     They  fay,  we  are  great  Cheats  in  felling  them 


422  Some  New  Voyages 

bad  Wares  four  times  dearer  than  they  are  worth,  by  way  of 
Exchange  for  their  Beaver-skins :  That  our  Fuzees  are  con- 
tinually burfting  and  laming  them,  after  they  have  paid  fuffi- 
cient  Prices  for  them.  I  wifh  I  had  time  to  recount  the 
innumerable  Abfurdities  they  are  guilty  of  relating  to  our 
Cuftoms,  but  to  be  particular  upon  that  Head  would  be  a 
Work  of  Ten  or  Twelve  Days. 

Their  Victuals  are  either  Boild  or  roafted,  and  they  lap 
great  quantities  of  the  Broath,  both  of  Meat  and  of  Fifh: 
They  cannot  bear  the  tafte  of  Salt  or  Spices,  and  wonder  that 
we  are  able  to  live  fo  long  as  thirty  Years,  confidering  our 
Wines,  our  Spices,  and  our  Immoderate  Ufe  of  Women. 
They  dine  generally  Forty  or  Fifty  in  a  Company,  and  fom- 
times  above  Three  Hundred :  Two  Hours  before  they  begin 
they  employ  themfelves  in  Dancing,  and  each  Man  fings  his 
Exploits,  and  thofe  of  his  Anceftors ;  they  dance  but  one  at 
a  time,  while  the  reft  are  fet  on  the  Ground,  and  mark  the 
Cadence  with  an  odd  Tone,  He,  He,  He,  He;  after  which 
every  one  rifes  and  dances  in  his  turn. 

The  Warriers  attempt  nothing  without  the  Advice  of 
the  Council,  which  is  compofed  of  the  Old  Men  of  the 
Nation;  that  is  to  fay,  fuch  as  are  above  Sixty:  Before  they 
are  affembled  a  [10]  Cryer  gives  notice  of  it  through  all  the 
Streets  in  the  Village :  Then  thefe  old  Old  Men  run  to  a  cer- 
tain Cottage  defign'd  for  that  purpofe,  where  they  feat  them- 
felves in  a  Square  Figure;  and  after  they  have  weigh'd  what  is 
propos'd  for  the  benefit  of  the  Nation,  the  Speaker  goes  out 
of  the  Cottage,  and  the  Young  Men  get  about  him,  and  liften 


to  North- America.  423 

with  great  attention  to  the  Refolves  of  the  Old  ones,  crying 

out  at  the  end  of  every  Sentence   That's  Good.1 

They  have  feveral  forts  of         ,„,-•» 

All  thefe  Dances  may  be  compared 
Dances.    The  principal  is  that     t0  Minerva>s  pyrrhiche.  For  while 

of  the   Calumet ;   the   reft  are      the  Savages  dance  with  a  Singular 

the    Chiefs    or    Commanders      Gravity,  they  humour  the  Cadences 

Dance,  the  Warriers  Dance,     ofJe?ain  *?'  whic^  Achilles>; 

Malitta  called  Hyperchematica.   / 
the  Marriage  Dance,  and  the     am  at  a  hfi  u  inform  you  whether 

Dance  of  the  Sacrifice.     They      the  Savages  had  thefe  Songs  from  the 

differ  from  one  another  both     Grecians,  or  the  Grecians  from  the 

in   the   Cadence   and    in   the       avaies- 

Leaps ;  but  'tis  importable  to  defcribe  them,  for  that  they  have 

fo  little  refemblance  to  ours.    That  of  the  Calumet  is  the  mod 

grave  and  handfome ;  but  they  don't  perform  that  but  upon 

certain  Occafions,  viz.     When  Strangers  pafs  through  their 

Country,  or  when  their  Enemies  fend  Ambaffadors  to  treat 

of  a  Peace.     If  they  approach  to  a  Village  by  Land,  when 

they're  ready  to  enter,  they  depute  one  of  this  Number,  who 

advances,  and  proclaims,  that  he  brings  the  Calumet  of  Peace ; 

the  reft  flopping  in  the  mean  time,  till  he  calls  to  them  to 

come:     Then  fome  of  the  Young   Men  march  out  of  the 


1The  council  is  the  most  important  institution  of  tribai  life,  and  of  indigenous 
growth.  For  a  good  description  of  forms  of  procedure,  and  the  ceremonies  connected 
therewith,  seejes.  Rel.,x,  pp.  251-263.  —  Ed. 

2  It  is  needless  to  say  that  there  was  no  historical  connection  between  Greek  and 
North  American  dances  and  their  accompanying  songs,  save  as  the  development  in 
these  lines  has  a  certain  similarity  among  all  primitive  peoples.  The  pyrricha  was  a 
war  dance  of  Doric  origin,  performed  by  men  in  armor  ;  while  the  hyporcheme  (hyper- 
chematica), allied  to  the  paean,  was  one  variety  of  the  song  or  cadence  that  accom- 
panied the  early  Greek  dances.  —  Ed. 


424  Some  New  Voyages 

Village,  at  the  Gate  of  which  they  form  an  Oval  Figure,  and 
when  the  Strangers  are  come  up  to  them,  they  dance  all 
at  a  time,  forming  a  Second  Oval  round  him  that  bears  the 
Calumet:  This  [11]  Dance  continues  half  an  Hour.  Then 
they  receive  the  Travellers  with  fome  Ceremony,  and  conduct 
them  to  a  Feaft.  The  Ceremonies  are  the  fame  to  thofe  that 
come  by  Water,  with  this  difference,  that  they  fend  a  Canoo 
to  the  Foot  of  the  Village,  with  the  Calumet  of  Peace,  upon  its 
Prow,  in  the  fhape  of  a  Maft,  and  one  comes  from  the  Village 
to  meet  'em.1  The  Dance  of  War  is  done  in  a  Circle,  during 
which  the  Savages  are  feated  on  the  Ground.  He  that  dances 
moves  from  the  Right  Hand  to  the  Left,  finging  in  the  mean 
time  the  Exploits  of  himfelf  and  his  Anceftors.  At  the  end 
of  every  Memorable  A&ion,  he  gives  a  great  Stroke  with  a 
Club  upon  a  Stake  plac'd  in  the  middle  of  the  Circle,  near 
certain  Players,  who  beat  Time  upon  a  fort  of  a  Kettle-Drum  ; 
Every  one  rifes  in  his  turn  to  fing  his  Song :  And  this  is  com- 
monly pra&is'd  when  they  go  to  War,  or  are  come  from  it. 

The  greateft  Paflion  of  the  Savages  confifts  in  the  Implac- 
able Hatred  they  bear  to  their  Enemies  ;  that  is,  all  Nations 
with  whom  they  are  at  Open  War:  They  value  themfelves 
mightily  upon  their  Valour ;  infomuch  that  they  have  fcarce 
any  regard  to  any  thing  elfe.  One  may  fay,  That  they  are 
wholly  govern' d  by  Temperament,  and  their  Society  is  perfect 
Mechanifm.  They  have  neither  Laws,  Judges,  nor  Priefts ; 
they  are  naturally  inclin'd  to  Gravity,  which  makes  them  very 


1  The  classic  description  of  the  calumet  dance  is  that  of  Marquette  ;  see  Jes. 
Rel.,  lix,  pp.  129-137.  —  Ed. 


to  North- America.  425 

circumfpect  in  their  Words  and  Actions.  They  obferve  a 
certain  Medium  between  Gayety  and  Melancholy.  The 
French  Air  they  could  not  away  with ;  and  there  was  none  but 
the  younger  fort  of  them  that  approv'd  of  our  Fafhions. 

I  have  feen  Savages  when  they've  come  a  great  way,  make 
no  other  Compliment  to  the  Family  than,  /  am  arriv'd,  I  wijh 
all  of  you  a  great  deal  of  [12]  Honour.  Then  they  take  their 
Pipe  quietly  without  asking  any  Queftions :  When  that's 
done,  they'l  fay,  Heark^e  Friend,  I  am  come  from  fuch  a  Place,  I 
faw  fuch  a  thing,  &c.  When  you  ask  a  Queftion,  their  Anfwer 
is  exceeding  concife,  unlefs  they  are  Members  of  the  Council; 
otherwife  you'll  hear  'em  fay,  That's  Good ;  That  fignifies 
nought;  That's  admirable;  That  has  Reafon  in  it;  Thai's 
valiant. 

If  you  tell  a  Father  of  a  Family  that  his  Children  have 
fignaliz'd  themfelves  againft  the  Enemy,  and  have  took 
feveral  Slaves,  his  Anfwer  is  fhort,  That's  Good,  without  any 
farther  Enquiry.  If  you  tell  him  his  Children  are  flain,  he'll 
fay  immediately,  That  fignifies  nought,  without  asking  how 
it  happen'd?  When  a  Jefuit  preaches  to  them  the  Truth  of 
the  Chriftian  Religion,  the  Prophecies,  Miracles,  &c.  they 
return  you,  a  Thais  wonderful,  and  no  more.  When  the 
French  tell  them  of  the  Laws  of  a  Kingdom ;  the  Juftice, 
Manners  and  Cuftoms  of  the  Europeans,  they'll  repeat  you  a 
hundred  times,  That's  reafonable.  If  you  difcourfe  them  upon 
an  Enterprife  of  great  importance,  or  that's  difficult  to  exe- 
cute, or  which  requires  much  thought,  they'll  fay,  That's 
Valiant,  without  explaining  themfelves,  and  will  liften  to  the 


426  Some  New  Voyages 

end  of  your  Difcourfe  with  great  attention :  Yet  'tis  to  be 
obferved,  when  they're  with  their  Friends  in  private,  they'll 
argue  with  as  much  boldnefs  as  thofe  of  the  Council.  'Tis 
very  ftrange,  that  having  no  advantage  of  Education,  but 
being  directed  only  by  the  Pure  Light  of  Nature,  they  mould 
be  able  to  furnifh  Matter  for  a  Conference  which  often  lafts 
above  three  Hours,  and  which  turns  upon  all  manner  of 
Things ;  and  mould  acquit  themfelves  of  it  fo  well,  that  I 
never  repented  the  time  I  fpent  with  thefe  truly  Natural 
Philofophers. 

[13]  When  a  Vint  is  paid  to  a  Savage,  at  going  in  you  muft 
fay,  /  am  come  tofeefucb  an  one :  Then  Fathers,  Mothers,  Wives, 
Children  go  out,  or  withdraw  themfelves  to  an  Apartment  at 
one  end  of  the  Cottage,  and  be  who  you  will,  come  not  near 
you  to  interrupt  your  Converfation.  The  Fafhion  is  for  him 
that  is  vifited,  to  offer  you  to  eat,  drink  and  fmoak  ;  and  one 
may  ufe  an  entire  freedom  with  them,  for  they  don't  much 
mind  Compliments.  If  one  means  to  vifit  a  Woman,  the  Cer- 
emony's the  fame;  /  am  come  to  fee  fuch  an  one;  then  every 
Body  withdraws,  and  you  tarry  alone  with  her  you  come  to 
fee ;  but  you  muft  not  mention  any  thing  Amorous  in  the  Day 
time,  as  I  fhall  inform  you  elfe  where. 

Nothing  furpriz'd  me  more  than  to  obferve  the  Quarrels 
between  their  Children  at  play :  A  little  after  they  are  warm'd, 
they'll  tell  one  another,  You  have  no  Soul,  You're  wicked,  You're 
treacherous :  In  the  mean  time  their  Companions  who  make  a 
Ring  about  them,  hear  all  quietly,  without  taking  one  fide  or 
t'other  till  they  fall  to  play  again  :  If  by  chance  they  come  to 


to  North-KmtviC2i.  ^iy 

Blows,  the  reft  divide  themfelves  into  two  Companies,  and 
carry  the  Quarrellers  home. 

They  are  as  ignorant  of  Geography  as  of  other  Sciences,  and 
yet  they  draw  the  moft  exact  Maps  imaginable  of  the  Coun- 
tries they're  acquainted  with,  for  there's  nothing  wanting  in 
them  but  the  Longitude  and  Latitude  of  Places  :  They  fet 
down  the  True  North  according  to  the  Pole  Star ;  The  Ports, 
Harbours,  Rivers,  Creeks  and  Coafts,  of  the  Lakes  ;  the 
Roads,  Mountains,  Woods,  Marfhes,  Meadows,  &c.  counting 
the  diftances  by  Journeys  and  Half-journeys  of  the  Warriers, 
and  allowing  to  every  Journey  Five  Leagues.  Thefe  Choro- 
grapbical  Maps  are  drawn  upon  the  Rind  of  your  Birch  Tree ; 
and  when  the  Old  Men  hold  a  Council  [14]  about  War  or 
Hunting,  they're  always  fure  to  confult  them.1 

The  Year  of  the  Outaouas,  the  Outagamis,  the  Hurons,  the 
Sauteurs,  the  Ilinois,  the  Oumamis,  and  feveral  other  Savages, 
confifts  of  Twelve-Synodical  Lunar-Months,  with  this  differ- 
ence, when  Thirty  Moons  are  fpent,  they  add  one  fupernu- 
merary  Month  to  make  it  up,  which  they  call  the  Loft  Moon, 
and  from  thence  begin  their  Account  again,  after  the  former 
Method.  All  thefe  Months  have  very  fuitable  Names;  for 
Inftance ;  What  we  name  March,  they  call  the  Worm-Moon, 
for  then  the  Worms  quit  the  Hollow  Chops  of  the  Trees 
where  they  fhelter'd  themfelves  in  the  Winter.  April  is  call'd 
the  Month  of  Plants ;  May  of  Flowers  and  fo  of  the  others.     I 


1  For  a  reproduction  of  an  Indian  map  drawn  by  the  savage  Ochagach  see 
Thwaites,  Rocky  Mountain  Exploration  (New  York,  1904),  p.  28.  Several  others 
are  in  the  atlas  (vol.  viii)  to  Original  Journals  of  the  Lezvis  and  Clark  Expedition 
(New  York,  1904).  —  Ed. 


428  Some  New  Voyages 

fay,  at  the  end  of  thefe  Thirty  Months,  the  next  that  follows 
is  fupernumerary,  and  not  counted ;  for  Example ;  We'll  fup- 
pofe  the  Month  of  March  to  be  the  Thirtieth  Lunar-Month, 
and  confequently,  the  Laft  of  the  Epocha.  Next  that  mould 
be  counted  the  Month  of  April ;  whereas  the  Loft  Moon  takes 
place  of  it,  and  muft  be  over  before  they  begin  their  Account 
again ;  and  this  Month  with  the  others,  makes  about  a  Year 
and  an  half.  Becaufe  they  have  no  Weeks,  they  reckon  from 
the  Firft  till  the  Twenty  Sixth  of  thefe  fort  of  Months,  and 
that  contains  juft  that  fpace  of  time  which  is  between  the  firft 
appearance  of  the  Moon  at  Night,  till  having  finifh'd  its 
Courfe,  it  becomes  almoft  invifible  in  the  Morning ;  and  this 
they  call  the  Illumination-Month.  For  Inftance ;  A  Savage 
will  fay,  /  went  away  the  firft  of  the  Month  of  Sturgeons  (that's 
Auguft),  and  returned  the  Twenty-ninth  of  the  Month  of  Indian- 
Corn  (the  fame  with  our  September);  and  next  day,  (which  is 
the  laft)  /  refted  my  felf.  As  for  the  remaining  three  Days 
and  a  half  of  the  Dead-Moon,  during  which  'tis  [15]  impof- 
fible  to  be  difcern'd,  they  give  them  the  Name  of  the  Naked 
Days.  They  make  as  little  ufe  of  Hours  as  Weeks,  having 
never  got  the  way  of  making  Clocks  or  Watches ;  by  the 
help  of  which  little  Inftruments,  they  might  divide  the  Natural 
Day  into  equal  parts.1  For  this  Reafon,  They  are  forc'd  to 
reckon  the  Natural  Day  as  well  as  the  Night,  by  Quarters, 
Half,  and  Three-quarters,  the  Rifing  and  the  Setting-Sun,  the 


1This  is  a  good  account  of  the  calendar  of  the  primitive  Indians,  usually  com- 
posed of  thirteen  lunar  months.  The  aborigines  of  Central  America,  Mayas  and 
Aztecs,  had  a  more  elaborate  system.  See  Thomas,  "Maya  Calendar,"  in  U.  S. 
Bureau  of  Ethnology,  Bulletin  No.  18.  — Ed. 


to  TVar^-America.  429 

Fore-noon  and  the  Evening.  As  they  have  a  wonderful  Idea 
of  any  thing  that  depends  upon  the  Attention  of  the  Mind,  and 
attain  to  an  ExacT:  Knowledge  of  many  Things  by  Long  Expe- 
rience :  To  crofs  a  Foreft  (for  Inftance)  of  a  Hundred  Leagues 
in  a  ftrait  Line,  without  ftraying  either  to  the  Right  or  Left; 
to  follow  the  Trad  of  a  Man  or  Beaft  upon  the  Grafs  or 
Leaves  :  So  they  know  the  Hour  of  the  Day  and  Night  exaclly, 
even  when  it  is  fo  cloudy,  that  neither  Sun  nor  Stars  appear. 
I  impute  this  Talent  to  a  fteddy  command  of  Mind,  which  is 
not  natural  to  any  but  thofe  whofe  Thoughts  are  as  little  dif- 
tracted  as  thefe  Mens  are. 

They  are  more  furpriz'd  to  fee  fome  little  Problemes  of 
Geometry  put  in  Practice,  than  we  would  be  to  fee  Water 
turn'd  into  Wine.  They  took  my  Graphometer  for  fomewhat 
Divine,  being  unable  to  guefs  how  we  could  know  the  diftance 
of  Places  without  meafuring  them  by  Cords  or  Rods,  without 
there  were  fome  Supernatural  Affiftance.  Longimetry  pleas'd 
them  far  more  than  Altimetry,  becaufe  they  thought  it  more 
neceffary  to  know  the  breadth  of  a  River,  than  height  of  a 
Tree,  £sfc.  I  remember  one  Day  in  a  Village  of  the  Outaouas 
at  Mijfilimakinac  a  Slave  brought  into  the  Cottage  where  I 
was,  a  fort  of  Veffel  made  of  a  thick  piece  of  foft  Wood, 
which  he  had  borrowed  on  purpofe,  in  which  [16]  he  pre- 
tended to  preferve  Mapletree-Water.  All  the  Savages  which 
faw  this  Veffel,  fell  to  arguing  how  much  it  would  hold,  and 
with  that  view  call'd  for  a  Pot,  and  for  Water  to  determine 
the  matter  by  Meafuring.  The  humor  took  me  to  lay  with 
them  a  Wager  of  a  Treat,  that  I  could  tell  the  Quantity  of 


430  Some  New  Voyages 

Water  that  would  fill  it  better  than  they.  So  that  finding  by 
my  Computation,  that  it  held  about  248  Pots,  or  thereabouts, 
I  went  to  make  the  Tryal,  and  made  them  not  a  little  wonder 
that  it  fail'd  but  one  or  two  Pots  ;  upon  which  I  perfwaded 
them,  that  the  Pots  that  were  wanting  were  fuck'd  up  by  the 
new  Wood.1  But  what  was  moft  pleafant  they  were  contin- 
ually begging  me  to  teach  them  Stereometry,  that  they  might 
make  ufe  of  it  upon  occafion :  'Twas  to  no  purpofe  to  tell 
them  'twas  impoffible  they  mould  underftand  it,  tho'  there 
were  Reafons  for't  that  might  convince  any  body  but  Savages. 
They  prefs'd  me  fo  much  to't  that  I  could  not  be  quiet  till  I 
was  forc'd  to  tell  them,  that  no  body  could  do  it  to  Perfection 
but  the  Jefuits. 

The  Savages  prefer  your  little  Convex  Glaffes  of  two 
Inches  Diemeter  to  any  others,  becaufe  they  give  but  a  faint 
Reprefentation  of  the  Pimples  and  Bloches  upon  their  Faces. 
I  remember  that  while  I  was  at  Miffilimakinac,  one  of  the  Ped- 
lers  call'd  Coureurs  de  Bois,  brought  a  Convex  Glafs  that  was 
pretty  large,  and  confequently  reprefented  the  Face  with  fome 
Deformity.  All  the  Savages  that  faw  this  Piece  of  Catoptricks, 
thought  it  no  lefs  Miraculous  than  the  awaker  of  a  Clock,  or 
a  Magical  Lanthern,  or  the  Spring  of  a  Machine.  But  what 
was  moft  Comical,  there  was  among  the  reft  of  the  Spectators 
a  Huronefe  Girl  who  told  the  Pedlar  in  a  jocofe  way,  That 
if  the  Glafs  had  the  Vertue  of  Magnifying  [17]  the  Objetls  really,  as 
it  did  in  appearance,  all  her  fhe  Companions  would  give  him  in  Ex- 
change as  many  Beaver  Skins  as  would  make  his  Fortune. 


1The  pot  is  a  French  liquid  measure  equal  to  3.29  English  pints.  —  Ed. 


to  North- America.  431 

The  Savages  have  the  raoft  happy  Memory  in  the  World. 
They  can  carry  their  Memory  fo  far  back,  that  when  our 
Governors  or  their  Deputies  treated  with  them  about  War, 
Peace  or  Trade,  and  propofed  things  contrary  to  what  was 
offer'd  Thirty  or  Forty  Years  ago ;  They  reply,  That  the 
French  are  falfe,  and  change  their  Opinion  every  Hour,  that 
'tis  fo  many  Years  fince  they  faid  fo  and  fo;  and  to  confirm  it 
bring  you  the  Porcelain  Colier  that  was  given  them  at  that 
time.  You  remember  I  acquainted  you  in  my  Seventh  Letter, 
that  the  Colters  are  the  Symbols  of  Contracts,  without  which 
they  conclude  no  Bufinefs  of  Moment.1 

They  pay  an  infinite  Deverence  to  Old  Age.  The  Son  that 
Laughs  at  his  Father's  Advice  fhall  tremble  before  his  Grand- 
father. In  a  Word,  they  take  the  Ancient  Men  for  Oracles, 
and  follow  their  Counfel  accordingly.  If  a  Man  tell  his  Son 
'tis  time  he  mould  Marry,  or  go  to  the  War,  or  the  Hunting, 
or  Shooting !  he  fhall  anfwer  carelefsly,  That's  Valiant,  I  thought 
Jo.  But  if  his  Grandfather  tell  him  fo,  the  Anfwer  is,  That's 
good,  It  fhall  be  done.  If  by  chance  they  kill  a  Partrige,  a 
Goofe,  or  Duck,  or  catch  any  delicate  Fifh,  they  never  fail  to 
prefent  it  to  their  oldeft  Relations.2 

The  Savages  are  wholly  free  from  Care ;  they  do  nothing 
but  Eat,  Drink,  Sleep,  and  ramble  about  in  the  Night  when 

1  See  p.  76,  ante .  —  Ed. 

2  The  evidence  upon  the  deference  paid  by  Indians  to  old  age,  is  conflicting. 
The  opinions  of  an  elderly  chief  had  especial  weight  in  council  ;  but  on  the  other 
hand  aged  people,  when  infirm,  were  frequently  abandoned  or  put  to  death  as  a  use- 
less burden.  See  Jes.  Rel.,  xx,  p.  239  ;  also  Original  Journals  of  the  Leivis  and 
Clark  Expedition,  index.  —  Ed. 


432  Some  New  Voyages 

they  are  at  their  Villages.  Having  no  fet  Hours  for  Meals, 
they  Eat  when  they're  hungry ;  and  commonly  do  it  in  a  large 
Company,  Feafting  here  and  there  by  turns.  The  Women 
and  Girls  do  the  fame  among  themfelves,  and  don't  admit 
any  Men  into  [18]  their  Company  at  that  time.  The  Women 
Slaves  are  employed  to  Sow  and  Reap  the  Indian-Corn ;  and 
the  Men  Slaves  have  for  their  Bufinefs  the  Hunting  and 
Shooting  where  there  is  any  Fatigue,  tho'  their  Mafters  will 
very  often  help  them.  They  have  three  forts  of  Games. 
Their  Game  of  Counters  is  purely  Numerical,  and  he  that 
can  Add,  Subftract,  Multiply  and  Divide  beft  by  thefe 
Counters  is  the  Winner.  This  depends  purely  upon  the 
Mind.  Another  Game  which  is  Hazard  and  Chance,  is  per- 
form'd  with  eight  little  Stones,  which  are  Black  on  one  fide 
and  White  on  the  other.  They're  put  on  a  Plate  which  they 
lay  on  the  Ground,  throwing  the  little  Stones  up  in  the  Air, 
and  if  they  fall  fo  as  to  turn  up  the  Black  fide  'tis  good 
luck.  The  odd  number  wins,  and  eight  Whites  or  Blacks 
wins  double,  but  that  happens  but  feldom.  They  have  a  third 
Play  with  a  Ball  not  unlike  our  Tennis,  but  the  Balls  are  very 
large,  and  the  Rackets  refemble  ours,  fave  that  the  Handle  is 
at  leaft  three  Foot  long.  The  Savages,  who  commonly  play 
at  it  in  large  Companies  of  three  or  four  Hundred  at  a  time, 
fix  two  Sticks  at  five  or  fix  Hundred  Paces  diftance  from  each 
other ;  They  divide  into  two  equal  Parties,  and  tofs  up  the 
Ball  about  half  way  between  the  two  Sticks.  Each  Party 
endeavour  to  tofs  the  Ball  to  their  fide ;  fome  run  to  the  Ball, 
and  the  reft  keep  at  a  little  diftance  on  both  fides  to  aflift  on 


to  North- America.  433 

all  Quarters.  In  fine  this  Game  is  fo  violent  that  they  tear 
their  Skins,  and  break  their  Legs  very  often  in  driving  to 
raife  the  Ball.  All  thefe  Games  are  made  only  for  Feafts  or 
other  trifling  Entertainments ;  for  'tis  to  be  obferv'd,  that  as 
they  hate  Money,  fo  they  never  put  it  in  the  Ballance,  and  one 
may  fay,  Intereft  is  never  the  occafion  of  Debates  among  them.1 

[19]  'Tis  not  to  be  denied  but  the  Savages  are  a  very 
fenfible  People,  and  are  perfectly  well  acquainted  with  the 
Intereft  of  their  Nations.  They  are  great  Moralifts,  efpecially 
when  they  Criticife  on  the  Manners  of  the  Europeans,  and  are 
mightily  upon  their  Guard  in  our  Company,  unlefs  it  be  with 
fuch  as  they  are  intimately  acquainted  with.  In  other  Matters 
they  are  Incredulous  and  Obftinate  to  the  laft  degree,  and  are 
not  able  to  diftinguifh  between  a  Chimerical  Suppofition  and 
an  undoubted  Truth,  or  between  a  fair  and  a  falfe  Confe- 
quence,  as  you'l  fee  in  the  infuing  Chapter,  which  treats  of 
their  Belief,  and  in  which  I  affure  you  you'l  meet  with  very 
odd  Notions. 


1  Lahontan  appears  to  intimate  that  the  Indians  do  not  gamble  for  gain  ;  never- 
theless, it  is  well-known  that  this  is  one  of  their  strongest  passions.  The  game  of  ball 
here  described  is  that  known  as  lacrosse,  a  modification  of  which  is  the  present  Cana- 
dian national  game.  For  description  see  Thwaites  (ed.),  "J.  Long's  Voyages," 
in  Early  Western  Travels,  ii,  pp.  89,  90.  —  Ed. 


2.3 


434  Some  New  Voyages 


''The  Belief  of  the  Savages,  and  the  Obftacles  of  their 
Converfion. 

ALL  the  Savages  are  convinc'd  that  there  rauft  be  a  God, 
becaufe  they  fee  nothing  among  Material  Beings  that 
fubfifts  neceffarily  and  by  its  own  Nature.  They  prove  the 
Exiftence  of  a  Deity  by  the  Frame  of  the  Univerfe,  which 
naturally  leads  us  to  a  higher  and  Omnipotent  Being,  from 
whence  it  follows,  fay  they,  that  Man  was  not  made  by 
chance,  and  that  he's  the  Work  of  a  Being  fuperior  in  Wif- 
dom  and  Knowledge,  which  they  call  the  Great  Spirit,  or  the 
Mafter  of  Life,  and  which  they  Adore  in  the  moft  abftradled 
and  fpiritual  manner.  They  deliver  their  Thoughts  of  him 
thus,  without  any  fatisfactory  Definition.  The  Exiftence  of 
God  being  infeparable  from  his  Effence,  it  contains  every 
thing,  it  appears  in  every  thing,  acts  in  every  thing,  and 
gives  motion  [20]  to  every  thing.  In  fine,  all  that  you  fee, 
all  that  you  can  conceive,  is  this  Divinity  which  fubfifts  with- 
out Bounds  or  Limits,  and  without  Body ;  and  ought  not  to 
be  reprefented  under  the  Figure  of  an  old  Man,  nor  of  any 
other  thing,  let  it  be  never  fo  fine  or  extenfive.  For  this 
Reafon  they  Adore  him  in  every  thing  they  fee.  When  they 
fee  any  thing  that's  fine  or  curious,  efpecially  when  they  look 
upon  the  Sun  or  Stars,  they  cry  out,  0  Great  Spirit,  we  difcern 


to  North- America.  435 

thee  in  every  thing.  And  in  like  manner  when  they  reflect  upon 
the  meaneft  Trifles  they  acknowledge  a  Creator  under  the 
Name  of  the  Great  Spirit  or  M after  of  Life.1 

I  forgot  to  tell  you  that  the  Savages  liften  to  all  the 
Jefuits  Preach  to  them  without  the  leaft  Contradiction.  They 
content  themfelves  to  rail  among  one  another  at  the  Sermons 
the  Fathers  make  at  Church,  and  if  a  Savage  talks  freely  to  a 
French-man  he  rauft  be  fully  affur'd  of  his  Difcretion  and 
Friendfhip.  I  have  been  frequently  much  puzzled  to  anfwer 
their  impertinent  Objections,  (for  they  can  make  no  others  in 
relation  to  Religion)  but  I  ftill  brought  my  felf  off  by  entreat- 
ing them  to  give  Ear  to  the  Jefuits.  To  prefent  you  with  a 
view  of  their  Opinion  relating  to  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul: 
They  all  believe  it ;  but  not  upon  the  plea  that  'tis  one  Ample 
fubftance,  and  that  the  Destruction  of  any  Natural  Being  is 
accomplifh'd  by  the  feparation  of  its  Parts ;  they're  Strangers 
to  that  Argument.  All  they  urge,  is,  that  if  the  Soul  were 
Mortal,  all  Men  would  be  equally  Happy  in  this  Life ;  for 
God  being  all  Perfection  and  Wifdom,  'twould  be  inconfiftent 


1  The  religious  beliefs  and  mythologic  development  of  the  North  American  Indian 
have  been  much  discussed,  and  but  little  determined.  The  evidence  of  Lahontan  is 
valuable  because  the  Indians  with  whom  he  associated  were  but  slightly  changed  by 
contact  with  the  European  missionaries,  and  because  his  own  materialistic,  skeptical 
bent  of  mind  divested  him  of  certain  preconceptions,  and  rendered  his  observation 
more  accurate.  His  account  of  the  spiritism  of  the  Algonquians  corresponds  with 
the  latest  scientific  conclusions  as  to  the  mythologic  stage  attained  by  the  aborigines  — 
that  it  was  neither  monotheistic  nor  pantheistic,  but  recognized  all  manifestations  of 
the  unseen,  yet  without  sense  of  personal  unity.  See  Powell,  "  Mythology  of  North 
American  Indians,"  in  U.  S.  Bur.  of  Eth.  Report,  1879-80,  pp.  17-56  ;  Brinton, 
Myths  of  the  New  World  (3d  ed.,  Phila.,  1896)  ;  Dorman,  Origin  of  Primitive 
Superstitions  among  the  Aborigines  of  America  (Phila.,  1881).  —  Ed. 


436  Some  New  Voyages 

with  his  Nature  to  create  fome  to  be  Happy  and  others  to  be 
Miferable.  So  they  prove  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul  by  the 
Hardships  of  Life  to  which  moft  Men  are  [21]  expos'd,  efpe- 
cially  the  beft  of  People,  when  they  are  Kill'd,  Tortur'd,  made 
Prifoners,  &c.  For  they  pretend,  that  by  a  Conduct  fomewhat 
ftrange  to  our  Apprehenfion,  the  Almighty  orders  a  certain 
number  of  Creatures  to  fuffer  in  this  World,  that  they  may  be 
fav'd  in  the  next ;  and  upon  that  fcore  they  cannot  endure  to 
hear  the  Chriftians  fay,  Such  a  one  has  had  the  misfortune  to 
be  Kill'd,  Wounded  or  made  a  Slave  ;  and  look  upon  what  we 
call  a  Misfortune  to  be  only  fuch  in  Fancy  and  Idea,  fince 
nothing  comes  to  pafs  but  by  the  Decrees  of  that  infinitely 
perfect  Being,  whofe  Conduct  cannot  be  FantafHcal  or  Capri- 
cious, as  they  falfely  pretend  we  Chriftians  think  it  to  be.  On 
the  contrary  they  think  thofe  Perfons  have  very  good  Fortune 
who  are  Kill'd.,  Burnt  or  taken  Prifoners.  'Tis  the  great  un- 
happinefs  of  thefe  Poor,  Blind  People,  that  they  will  not  fuffer 
themfelves  to  be  inftructed :  For  their  Opinions  are  not  in  all 
refpects  contrary  to  the  Light  of  the  Gofpel.  They  believe 
that  God  for  Reafons  above  our  reach  makes  ufe  of  the  Suf- 
ferings of  good  People  to  difplay  his  Juftice  ;  and  in  this  Point 
we  cannot  oppofe  them,  for  'tis  one  of  the  Principles  of  our 
own  Religion :  But  when  they  alledge  that  we  look  upon  the 
Divinity  as  a  whimfical  fantaftick  Being,  are  they  not  under 
the  greateft  miftake?  The  firft  and  fupreme  caufe  muft  be 
fuppos'd  to  make  the  wifeft  choice  of  means  conducing  to  an 
end.  If  then  'tis  true,  as  'tis  a  Point  of  our  Belief,  that  God 
does  permit  the  Sufferings  of  the  Innocent,  'tis  our  part  to 


to  iVflr^-America.  437 

Adore  his  Wifdom,  and  not  be  fo  arrogant  as  to  Cenfure  it. 
One  of  the  Savages  that  argued  the  Point  with  me,  alledg'd 
that  we  reprefented  the  Divinity  like  a  Man  that  had  but  a  little 
Arm  of  the  Sea  to  crofs,  and  rather  chofe  to  take  a  [22]  turn 
of  five  or  fix  Hundred  Leagues  about.  This  Quibble  puzzled 
me  a  little  :  For  why,  fays  \\Q,fince  God  can  bring  Men  to  Eternal 
Happinefs  by  rewarding  Vertue  and  Merit,  why  does  not  he  go  that 
fliorteft.  way  to  Work  f  Why  does  he  condutl  a  juft  Man  to  the 
Eternal  Beatitude  by  the  path  of  Sufferings  ?  Thus  'tis  that  thefe 
poor  Savages  contradict  themfelves,  and  from  hence  it  appears, 
that  Jefus  Chrifl,  our  Lord  and  Matter,  is  the  only  Author  of 
fuch  Truths  as  fupport  themfelves,  and  contain  not  the  lead 
fhadow  of  Contradiction.  In  a  Word,  the  fingular  madnefs 
of  this  unfortunate  People  confifts  in  denying  their  Affent  to 
any  thing  but  what's  vifible  and  probable.  This  is  the  (land- 
ing and  true  Principle  of  their  Religion,  when  you  confider  it 
abftradtedly  :  But  if  you  ask  them  in  particular  why  they  Adore 
God  in  the  Sun,  rather  than  in  a  Tree  or  a  Mountain;  their 
Anfwer  is,  That  they  choofe  to  admire  the  Deity  in  publick  by 
pointing  to  the  moft  glorious  thing  that  Nature  affords.1 

The  Jefuits  ufe  their  utmoft  Efforts  to  make  them  fenfible 
of  the  Importance  of  Salvation.  They  explain  to  them  the 
Holy  Scriptures,  and  fet  forth  the  manner  by  which  the  Law 
of  Chrift  J  ejus  took  place  in  the  World,  and  the  change  that  it 
wrought.     They  lay  before  them  the  Prophecies,  Revelations 

1  This  is  in  accord  with  modern  conclusions,  that  the  North  Americans  did  not 
worship  the  sun,  save  as  a  symbol.  The  fashion  of  a  decade  or  more  ago,  to  explain 
moL-t  myths  as  solar  in  origin,  is  not  to-day  held  sufficient.  — Ed. 


438  Some  New  Voyages 

and  Miracles,  by  which  our  Religion  is  inforc'd.  But  the 
poor  Wretches  are  fuch  obftinate  Infidels,  that  all  the  Char- 
acters of  Truth,  Sincerity  and  Divinity  that  mine  throughout 
the  Scriptures,  have  no  impreffion  upon  them.  The  greateft 
length  that  the  good  Fathers  can  bring  them  to,  is  to  acqui- 
efce  after  a  Savage  manner,  contrary  to  what  they  think.  For 
Inftance,  when  the  Jefuits  Preach  up  the  Incarnation  of  Jefus 
Chrift,  they'l  answer,  That's  Wonderful:  When  the  Queftion  is 
[23]  put  to  them,  whether  they'l  turn  Chriftians,  they  reply, 
that  they'l confider  of 'it.  If  the  fecular Europeans  follicit  them  to 
come  to  Church  to  hear  the  Word  of  God,  they  reply,  'Tis 
reafonable;  the  meaning  of  which  is,  that  they'l  come;  but  at 
the  bottom  they  have  no  other  defign  in  approaching  to  the 
place  of  Worfhip,  than  to  fnatch  away  a  Pipe  of  Tobacco, 
or  to  Ridicule  the  good  Fathers,  as  I  intimated  above :  For 
they  have  fuch  happy  Memories,  that  I  knew  ten  of  my  own 
Acquaintance  that  had  all  the  Holy  Scriptures  by  Heart. 

'Twill  be  worth  your  while  to  hear  the  thoughts  of  Reafon 
that  come  from  thofe  People  who  pafs  for  Beafts  among  us. 
They  maintain,  That  a  Man  ought  never  to  (trip  himfelf  of 
the  Privileges  of  Reafon,  that  being  the  nobleft  Faculty  with 
which  God  hath  enrich'd  him ;  and  That  forafmuch  as  the 
Religion  of  the  Chriftians  is  not  put  to  the  teft  of  their  Rea- 
fon, it  cannot  be  but  that  God  ridicul'd  them  in  enjoyning 
them  to  confult  their  Reafon  in  order  to  diftinguifh  Good  from 
Evil.  Upon  this  fcore  they  affirm  that  Reafon  ought  not  to 
be  controul'd  by  any  Law,  or  put  under  a  neceflity  of  approv- 
ing what  it  doth  not  comprehend  ;  and  in  fine,  that  what  we 


to  North-America.  439 

call  an  Article  of  Faith  is  an  intoxicating  Potion  to  make 
Reafon  reel  and  ftagger  out  of  its  way  ;  forfomuch  as  the  pre- 
tended Faith  may  fupport  Lies  as  well  as  the  Truth,  if  we 
underftand  by  it  a  readinefs  to  believe  without  diving  to  the 
bottom  of  things.  They  pretend  that  if  they  had  a  mind  to 
talk  in  the  Language  of  the  Chriftians,  they  might  with  equal 
right  reject  the  Arguments  propos'd  by  the  Chriftians  againft 
their  Opinions,  and  plead  that  their  Opinions  are  Incompre- 
henfible  Myfteries,  and  that  we  muft  not  pretend  to  fathom 
the  Secrets  [24]  of  the  Almighty,  which  are  plac'd  fo  far 
above  our  weak  reach. 

'Tis  in  vain  to  remonftrate  to  them,  That  Reafon  gives 
only  a  faint  and  dazzling  Light  which  leades  thofe  to  a  Preci- 
pice that  truft  to  its  Direction  and  Conduct; :  That  'tis  a  flave 
to  Faith  and  ought  to  obey  it  blindly  without  difputing,  juft 
as  an  Iroquefe  Captive  does  his  Mafter.  'Tis  needlefs  to  repre- 
fent  to  them,  that  the  Holy  Scriptures  can  contain  nothing 
that's  directly  repugnant  to  right  Reafon.  They  make  a  jeft 
of  all  fuch  Remonftrances,  for  they  imagine  fo  great  a  Contra- 
diction between  the  Scripture  and  Reafon,  that  they  think  it 
impoffible  for  the  Advocates  of  the  former  to  avoid  the  receiv- 
ing of  very  dubious  Opinions  for  certain  and  evident  Truths. 
Their  Prejudice  proceeds  from  this,  that  they  can't  be  con- 
vinc'd,  that  the  Infallibility  of  the  Scripture  is  to  be  made  out 
by  the  Light  of  Reafon.  The  Word  Faith  is  enough  to  choak 
them  ;  they  make  a  Jeft  of  it,  and  alledge  that  the  Writings 
of  paft  Ages  are  falfe,  fuppofititious  and  alter'd,  upon  the 
Plea  that  the  Hiftories  of  our  own  times  are  juftly  liable  to  the 


44o  Some  New  Voyages 

fame  Cenfure.  They  plead,  That  a  Man  muft  be  a  Fool  who 
believes  that  an  Omnipotent  Being,  continued  from  all  Eter- 
nity, in  a  ftate  of  Inactivity,  and  did  not  think  of  giving  being 
to  Creatures  till  within  thefe  five  or  fix  Thoufand  Years ;  or 
that  at  that  time  God  Created  Adam  on  purpofe  to  have  him 
tempted  by  an  evil  Spirit  to  eat  of  an  Apple,  and  that  he 
occafion'd  all  the  Mifery  of  his  Pofterity  by  the  pretended 
tranfmiflion  of  his  Sin.  They  ridicule  the  Dialogue  between 
Eve  and  the  Serpent,  alledging  that  we  affront  God  in  fuppof- 
ing  that  he  wrought  the  Miracle  of  giving  this  Animal  the 
ufe  of  Speech,  with  intent  to  deftroy  all  the  Humane  Race. 

[25]  To  continue  their  wild  Remonftrances  they  fay,  '  'Tis 
'  a  thing  unheard  of,  that  for  the  expiation  of  Adam's  Sin  God 
'  fhould  put  God  to  Death  to  fatisfie  himfelf ;  That  the  Peace 
'of  the  World  mould  be  brought  about  by  the  Incarnation 
1  of  God  and  his  fhameful  Death ;  That  his  Difciples  fhould 
1  be  ignorant  Men  that  fear'd  to  dye.  This,  they  fay,  is  ftill 
'  the  more  unaccountable,  that  the  Sin  of  the  firft  Father  hath 
1  done  more  harm  than  the  Death  of  the  latter  hath  done 
'  good,  the  Apple  having  intail'd  Death  on  all  Men,  whereas 
'  the  Blood  of  Jefus  hath  not  fav'd  one  half  of  them.  They 
argue,  'That  upon  the  Humanity  of  this  God  the  Chriftians 
'  build  a  Religion  without  a  Foundation,  which  is  fubject  to 
'  the  Changes  and  Viciflitudes  of  Humane  Affairs.  That  this 
'  Religion  being  divided  and  fubdivided  into  fo  many  Seels, 
'  as  thofe  of  the  French,  the  Englijli,  C5?c.  it  can  be  no  other 
'  than  an  Human  Artifice  :  For  had  God  been  the  Author  of 
'  it,  his  Providence  had  prevented  fuch  diverfity  of  Sentiments 


to  North-America.  441 

1  by  unambiguous  Decifions.  That  if  the  Evangelical  Law 
1  had  defcended  from  Heaven  it  had  not  contain'd  thofe 
4  obfcure  Sayings  that  give  rife  to  the  Chriftian  Diflenfions ; 
'  for  that  God  who  forefees  what  is  in  the  Womb  of  Futurity 
4  would  have  deliver'd  his  Precepts  in  fuch  clear  and  precife 
1  terms  as  would  leave  no  room  for  Difputes. 

1  But  fuppofing  (continue  they)  that  this  Law  defcended 
4  from  Heaven,  which  of  the  Chriftian  Seels  muft  we  join  with? 
1  For  we  underftand  from  an  infinite  number  of  Chriftians,  that 
4  in  fome  Communions  we  run  the  rifque  of  Damnation.' 
The  great  Article  that  they  ftickle  molt  at  is  the  Incarnation 
of  God.  They  exclaim  againft  the  fuppofition  that  the  Divine 
[26]  Word  was  fhut  up  for  nine  Months  in  the  Bowels  of  a 
Woman,  and  that  the  fame  God  came  to  take  up  an  Earthly 
Body  in  this  World,  and  carry'd  it  up  to  his  Seat  of  Blifs. 
Nay,  they  carry  the  thing  farther,  for  they  rally  upon  the 
unevennefs  and  inconftancy  of  Cbrift}s  Will.  Tho'  he  came 
into  the  World  to  dye,  fay  they,  yet  it  appears  that  he  had  no 
mind  to  it,  and  that  he  was  affraid  to  Die.  If  the  Divinity 
and  Humanity  had  made  but  one  Perfon,  he  would  not  have 
needed  to  pray  or  ask  for  any  thing ;  nay,  fuppofing  that  his 
Divine  Nature  had  not  the  Afcendant  within  him,  yet  he  ought 
not  to  have  fear'd  Death,  in  regard  that  the  lofs  of  a  Tem- 
poral Life  is  nothing  to  one  that  is  affur'd  of  reviving  for 
ever ;  he  knew  for  certain  where  he  was  a  going,  and  confe- 
quently  ought  to  have  embrae'd  Death  more  chearfully  than 
we  do,  when  we  Poyfon  our  felves  in  order  to  accompany  our 
Relations  to  the  Country  of  Souls. 


442  Some  New  Voyages 

They  brand  St.  Paul  for  a  Phantaftical  Man,  alledging  that 
he  contradicts  himfelf  every  Foot,  and  Reafons  very  forrily. 
They  Ridicule  the  Credulity  of  the  Primitive  Chriftians,  whom 
they  look  upon  as  fimple  and  fuperftitious  Creatures ;  and 
upon  that  Head  take  occafion  to  fay,  That  the  Apoftle  Paul 
would  have  found  a  great  deal  of  difficulty  in  perfwading  the  People 
of  Canada  that  he  was  ravifh'd  up  to  the  third  Heaven.  There's 
one  place  of  Scripture  above  all  other  that  they  can't  digeft, 
viz.  Many  are  called,  but  few  chosen.  Their  Comment  upon  it 
is  this,  God  hath  faid,  that  many  are  call'd  but  few  chofen,  and 
what  God  fays  mufl  needs  be  true.  Now,  if  of  three  Men  only  one 
be  sav'd,  and  the  other  two  damn'd,  then  the  Condition  of  a  Stag  is 
preferable  to  that  of  a  Man  ;  Nay,  put  it  upon  an  even  lay,  and  let 
there  be  but  one  Man  damn'1  d  for  one  fav' d ,  even  then  the  Stag  hath 
the  better  of  [27]  it.  This  Objection  was  once  put  to  me  by 
the  Rat,  or  the  General  of  the  Savages,  when  I  was  a  Hunting 
with  him.  I  reply'd,  that  we  ought  to  indeavour  to  be  in  the 
number  of  the  Chofen  by  following  the  Law  and  the  Precepts 
of  Jefus  Chrift.  But  my  Anfwer  did  not  fatisfie  him,  for  he 
ftill  ran  upon  the  great  rifque  of  two  Men  damn'd  for  one 
fav'd,  and  that  by  an  immutable  Decree.  Upon  that  I  refer'd 
him  to  the  Jefuits,  for  I  durft  not  tell  him,  That  'twas  in  his 
own  Power  to  procure  his  Election :  If  I  had,  he  had  given 
me  lefs  Quarter  than  he  did  to  St.  Paul;  for  in  Religious 
Matters  they  always  ftick  to  Probability.  This  General  was 
not  fo  void  of  good  Senfe,  but  that  he  could  think  juftly  and 
make  true  Reflections  upon  Religious  Matters ;  but  he  was  fo 
prepoffefs'd  with   an  Opinion,  that  the   Chriftian  Faith  was 


to  iVor^-America.  443 

contrary  to  Reafon,  that  all  the  Attempts  I  made  could  not 
convince  him  of  the  contrary.  When  I  laid  before  him  the 
Revelations  of  Mofes  and  the  Prophets,  the  univerfal  Confent 
of  almoft  all  Nations  in  owning  and  acknowledging  Jefus 
Chrifl,  the  Martyrdom  of  his  Difciples  and  of  the  Primitive 
Chriftians,  the  perpetual  Succeflion  of  our  Sacred  Oracles,  the 
entire  Deftruclion  of  the  Jewish  Republick,  and  the  Defini- 
tion of  Jerufalem  foretold  by  our  Saviour;  he  ask'd  me  if  my 
Father  or  my  Grandfather  had  feen  all  thefe  Events,  and 
whether  I  was  fo  credulous  as  to  take  our  Scriptures  for 
Truth,  fince  the  Hiftories  of  Countries  writ  but  t'other  Day 
are  found  to  be  Fabulous.  He  added,  That  the  Faith  which 
the  Jefuits  beat  their  Brains  about  imported  no  more  than  to 
be  perfwaded  of  a  thing  either  by  feeing  it  with  their  Eyes,  or 
by  finding  it  recommended  by  clear  and  folid  Proofs ;  That 
thefe  Fathers  and  I  were  fo  far  from  convincing  them  of  the 
truth  of  our  [28]  Myfleries,  that  we  only  cover'd  their 
Thoughts  with  Obfcurity  and  Darknefs. 

Such,  Sir,  is  the  Obftinacy  and  prepoffeflion  of  this  People. 
I  flatter  my  felf  that  this  fhort  view  of  their  Notions  may 
divert  you  without  Offence.  I  know  that  you  are  too  well 
confirm'd  and  rivetted  in  our  moft  Holy  Faith,  to  receive  any 
dangerous  Impreffion  from  their  impious  Advances.  I  affure 
my  felf  that  you  will  joyn  with  me  in  bemoaning  the  deplor- 
able {late  of  thefe  ignorant  Wretches.  Let  us  jointly  admire 
the  depth  of  the  Divine  Providence,  which  permits  thofe 
Nations  to  entertain  fuch  an  Averfion  to  our  Divine  Truths ; 
and  in  the  mean  time  let  us  make  the  bed  ufe  of  the  unde- 


444  Some  New  Voyages 

ferv'd  Advantage  we  have  over  them.  Give  me  leave  to 
acquaint  you  with  the  Reflections  that  thefe  fame  Savages 
make  upon  our  Conduct  when  they  confine  themfelves  to  the 
Subject  of  Morality.  The  Chriftians,  say  they,  contemn  the 
Precepts  of  the  Son  of  God,  they  make  a  Jcft  of  his  Prohibitions,  and 
doubt  of  the  Sincerity  of  his  Expreffions ;  for  they  counterabl  his 
Orders  without  intermiffion,  and  rob  him  of  the  Worfhip  which  he 
claims  as  his  due,  by  paying  it  to  Silver,  to  Beavers,  and  to  their 
own  Intereft.  They  murmur  againft  Heaven  and  him  when  things 
go  crofs  with  them;  they  go  about  their  ufual  Bufinefs  on  fuch  Days 
as  are  fet  apart  for  Works  of  Piety  and  Devotion,  and  fpend  both 
that  and  the  other  parts  of  their  time  in  Gaming,  Drinking  to 
excefs,  Fighting  and  Scolding.  Inftead  of  Comforting  their  Parents 
they  leave  them  for  a  Sacrifice  to  Hunger  and  Mifery,  and  not  only 
deride  their  Counfel,  but  wifh  impatiently  for  their  Death .  In  the 
Night  time,  all  of  them,  barring  the  Jefuits,  roll  from  Houfe  to 
Houfe  to  debauch  the  Women  Savages.  They  Murther  one  another 
every  Day  upon  the  Plea  of  Theft  or  Affronts,  or  upon  the  fcore 
of  Women  ;  they  Pillage  and  Rob  one  another  without  [29]  any 
regard  to  the  tyes  of  Blood  or  Friendfhip,  as  often  as  they  meet  with 
an  opportunity  of  doing  it  with  impunity.  They  befpatter  and  de- 
fame one  another  with  outragious  Calumnies  ;  and  make  no  fcruple 
to  lye  when  they  find  'twill  ferve  their  Intereft.  They  are  not  fatif- 
fied  with  the  Company  of  fingle  Women,  but  debauch  other  Mens 
Wives;  and  thefe  Adulterous  Women  bring  forth  in  the  abfcence  of 
their  Husbands  a  fpurious  Off-fpring,  that  are  at  a  lofs  to  know 
their  Fathers.  In  fine,  (continue  they)  though  the  Chriftians  are 
fo  docile  as  to  believe  the  Humanity  of  God,  which  is  the  moft  unrea- 


to  North-Kmznca..  445 

fonable  Article  that  can  be  ;  yet  they  feem  to  doubt  of  his  Precepts, 
and  incejfantly  tranfgrefs  them,  notwithftanding  they  are  very  pure 
and  reafonable.  I  mould  never  come  to  an  end,  if  I  enter'd 
into  the  Particulars  of  their  Savage  way  of  Reafoning ;  and 
for  that  reafon  'twill  be  more  proper  to  take  leave  of  this 
Subject,  and  pafs  directly  to  the  manner  of  Worfhip  which 
they  offer  to  their  great  Spirit  or  God,  call'd  Kitchi  Manitou. 
A  view  of  that  will  be  more  agreeable  than  the  tedious  Series 
of  this  fort  of  Philofophy,  which  at  the  bottom  is  but  too 
true,  and  affords  matter  of  Grief  to  all  good  Souls  that  are 
perfwaded  of  the  Truth  of  Chriftianity. 


446  Some  New  Voyages 


The  way  of  JVorfhip,  ufed  by  the  Savages. 

p 

EFORE  we  launch  out  into  the  particulars  of  their  Wor- 
ship, 'twill  be  proper  to  remark  that  the  Savages  give 
the  name  of  Genius  or  Spirit  to  all  that  furpaffes  their  Under- 
ftanding,  and  proceeds  from  a  caufe  that  they  cannot  trace. 
Some  of  thefe  Spirits  they  take  to  be  Good,  and  fome  Bad  ; 
of  the  former  fort  are  the  Spirit  of  [30]  Dreams,  the  Michi- 
bichi  mentioned  in  my  lift  of  Animals,  a  Solar  Quadrant,  an 
Alarm  Watch,  and  an  infinity  of  other  things  that  feem  to 
them  to  be  inconceivable.  Of  the  latter  fort  are  Thunder, 
Hail  falling  upon  their  Corn,  a  great  Storm,  and  in  a  word  every 
thing  that  tends  to  their  Prejudice,  and  proceeds  from  a  caufe 
that  they  are  ignorant  of.  If  a  Fufee  burft  either  through  the 
fault  of  the  Metal,  or  by  being  over  Loaded,  and  Maims  a 
Man,  they'll  tell  you  there  was  an  Evil  Spirit  lodg'd  within  it. 
If  by  chance  the  Branch  of  a  Tree  put  out  a  Mans  Eye,  the 
effect  is  owing  to  an  Evil  Spirit ;  If  a  fudden  guft  of  Wind 
furprifes  'em  in  a  Canow  about  the  middle  of  their  Paffage 
acrofs  the  Lakes,  'tis  an  Evil  Spirit  that  difturbs  the  Air;  if 
the  dregs  of  any  Violent  Diftemper  robs  a  Man  of  his  Reafon, 
'tis  an  Evil  Spirit  that  Torments  him.  Thefe  Evil  Spirits  they 
call  Matchi  Manitous,  and  Gold  and  Silver  they  lift  into  that 


to  North- America..  447 

number.1  However,  'tis  to  be  obferv'd  that  they  talk  of  thefe 
Spirits  in  a  Bantering  way,  or  much  after  the  fame  manner 
that  our  fhrewd  Europeans  rally  upon  Magicians  and  Sorcerers. 
Here  I  cannot  forbear  to  repeat  once  more  that  the  Hif- 
torical  Accounts  of  Canada,  are  as  fcarce  as  the  Geographical 
Maps  of  that  Country  ;  for  I  never  met  with  a  true  one  but 
once,  and  that  in  the  hands  of  a  Quebec  Gentleman,  the  Im- 
preflion  of  which  was  afterwards  Prohibited  at  Paris,  but  for 
what  reafon  I  know  not.  I  mention  this  with  regard  to  their 
opinion  of  the  Devil ;  for  it  is  alledg'd  that  the  Savages  are 
acquainted  with  the  Devil.  I  have  read  a  thoufand  Ridiculous 
Stories  Writ  by  our  Clergymen,  who  maintain  that  the  Savages 
have  conferences  with  him,  and  not  only  confult  him,  but  pay 
him  a  fort  of  Homage.  Now  all  thefe  advances  are  ridicu- 
lous ;  for  in  earneft,  the  Devil  never  appear'd  to  thefe  Amer- 
icans. [31]  I  ask'd  an  infinity  of  Savages  whether  the  Devil 
was  ever  feen  among  'em  in  the  fhape  of  a  Man  or  any  other 
Animal ;  I  likewife  confulted  upon  this  head  the  ingenioufeft 
of  their  Mountebanks  or  Jugglers,  who  are  a  very  Comical 
fort  of  Fellows  (as  you  mall  hear  anon  ;)  and  it  may  be  rea- 
fonably  prefum'd  that  if  ever  the  Devil  appear'd  to  'em,  they 
had  been  fure  to  have  told  me  of  it.  In  fine,  after  ufing  all 
poffible  means  for  a  perfect  knowledg  of  this  matter  ;  I  con- 
cluded that  thefe  Eccleflafticks  did  not  understand  the  true 


1  Brinton  considers  that  the  idea  of  dualism  of  spirits,  so  far  as  ethical  qualities 
were  concerned,  was  borrowed  from  Europeans;  the  Indians  believed  in  benevolent 
and  mischievous  spirits,  not  because  of  a  moral  nature,  but  because  of  the  effect  upon 
their  own  lives,  —  Ed. 


448  Some  New  Voyages 

importance  of  that  great  word  Matchi  Manitou,  (which  figni- 
fies  an  Evil  Spirit,  Matchi  being  the  word  for  Evil  and  Manitou 
for  Spirit ;)  For  by  the  Devil  they  underftand  fuch  things  as 
are  offenfive  to  'em,  which  in  our  Language  comes  near  to  the 
fignification  of  Misfortune,  Fate,  Unfavourable  Deftiny,  &?<:. 
So  that  in  fpeaking  of  the  Devil  they  do  not  mean  that  Evil 
Spirit  that  in  Europe  is  reprefented  under  the  figure  of  a  Man, 
with  a  long  Tail  and  great  Horns  and  Claws.1 

The  Savages  never  Offer  Sacrifices  of  Living  Creatures  to 
the  Kitcbi  Manitou;  for  their  common  Sacrifices  upon  that 
occafion  are  the  Goods  that  they  take  from  the  French  in  ex- 
change for  Beavers.  Several  perfons  of  good  Credit  have 
inform'd  me,  that  in  one  day  they  Burnt  at  Mijfilimakinac, 
Fifty  Thoufand  Crowns  worth  of  fuch  Goods.  I  never  faw 
fo  Expenfive  a  Ceremony,  my  felf :  But  let  that  be  as  it  will, 
the  particular  circumftances  of  the  Sacrifice  are  thefe.  The 
Air  muft  be  Clear  and  Serene,  the  Weather  Fair  and  Calm  ; 
and  then  every  one  brings  his  Offering  and  laies  it  upon  the 
Wood-Pile  :  When  the  Sun  mounts  higher  the  Children  make 
a  Ring  round  the  Pile,  with  pieces  of  Bark  Lighted,  in  order 
to  fet  it  on  Fire ;  and  the  Warriours  Dance  and  [32]  Sing 
round  'em  till  the  whole  is  Burnt  and  Confumed,  while  the 
Old  Men  make  their  Harangues  addrefs'd  to  the  Kitchi  Man- 


1  Lahontan's  skeptical  instincts  revolted  against  the  prevalent  idea  that  all  the 
gods  of  the  savages  were  some  manifestation  of  the  devil  —  a  conception  that  vitiates 
many  of  the  recorded  observations  of  Indian  myths  in  the  Jesuit  Relations.  On  this 
subject  see  Brinton,  Myths  of  the  New  World,  pp.  75-82.  The  Moravian  mission- 
aries asserted  that  the  aborigines  ' '  seem  to  have  had  no  idea  of  the  Devil,  as  the  Prince 
of  Darkness,  before  the  Europeans  came  into  the  country  ;  "  —  Loskiel,  History  of  the 
Mission  of  the  United  Brethren  (London,  1794),  i,  p.  34. —  Ed. 


to  North-America.  449 

itou,  and  prefent  him  from  time  to  time  with  Pipes  of  Tobacco 
Lighted  at  the  Sun.  Thefe  Dances,  Songs  and  Harangues 
laft  till  Sun  fet,  only  they  allow  themfelves  fome  intervals  of 
Reft,  in  which  they  fit  down  and  Smoak  at  their  Eafe. 

It  remains  only  (before  I  make  an  end  of  this  Chapter)  to 
repeat  the  very  Words  of  their  Harangues  pronounc'd  by 
the  Old  Fellows,  and  of  the  Songs  fung  by  the  Warriors: 
Great  Spirit,  Mafter  of  our  Lives ;  Great  Spirit,  Mafter  of 
all  Things  both  Vifible  and  Invifible ;  Great  Spirit,  Mafter 
of  other  Spirits,  whether  good  or  Evil;  command  the  Good 
Spirits  to  favour  thy  Children,  the  Outaouas,  &c.  Command 
the  Evil  Spirits  to  keep  at  a  diftance  from  'em.  O  Great 
Spirit,  keep  up  the  Strength  and  Courage  of  our  Warriors, 
that  they  may  be  able  to  ftem  the  fury  of  our  Enemies :  Pre- 
ferve  the  Old  Perfons,  whofe  Bodies  are  not  quite  wafted, 
that  they  may  give  Counfel  to  the  Young.  Preferve  our 
Children,  enlarge  their  Number,  deliver  'em  from  Evil 
Spirits,  to  the  end  that  in  our  old  Age  they  may  prove  our 
Support  and  Comfort ;  preferve  our  Harveft  and  our  Beafts, 
if  thou  mean'ft  that  we  fhould  not  die  for  Hunger  :  Take 
care  of  our  Villages,  and  guard  our  Huntfmen  in  their  Hunt- 
ing Adventures.  Deliver  us  from  all  Fatal  Surprizes,  when 
thou  ceafeft  to  vouchfafe  us  the  Light  of  the  Sun,  which 
fpeaks  thy  Grandeur  and  Power.  Acquaint  us  by  the  Spirit 
of  Dreams,  with  what  thy  Pleafure  requires  of  us,  or  pro- 
hibits us  to  do.  When  it  pleafes  thee  to  put  a  Period  to 
our  Lives,  fend  us  to  the  great  Countrey  of  Souls,  where  we 
may   meet   with   thofe    of   our   Fathers,   our   Mothers,   our 

29 


45°  Some  New  Voyages 

'Wives,  [33]  our  Children,  and  our  other  Relations.  O 
1  Great  Spirit,  Great  Spirit,  hear  the  Voice  of  the  Nation,  give 
1  ear  to  all  thy  Children,  and  remember  them  at  all  times. 

As  for  the  Songs  which  the  Warriors  ling  till  Sun  fet,  they 
are  to  this  purpofe  :  '  Take  heart,  the  Great  Spirit  vouchfafes 
4  fuch  a  Glorious  Sun ;  Cheer  up  my  Brethren :  How  great 
'  are  his  Works  !  How  fine  is  the  Day !  this  Great  Spirit  is 
'  all  Goodnefs ;  'tis  he  that  fets  all  the  Springs  in  motion ; 
1  he  ruleth  over  all :  He  is  pleas'd  to  hear  us  ;  Let  us  cheer  up 
1  my  Brethren,  we  mall  fubdue  our  Enemies  :  Our  Fields  fhall 
'  bear  Corn  ;  our  Hunting  fhall  fucceed  well ;  we  fhall  all  of 
'us  keep  our  Health;  the  Old  Perfons  fhall  rejoice,  the  Chil- 
'  dren  fhall  increafe,  and  the  Nation  fhall  profper.  But  now 
'  the  Great  Spirit  leaves  us,  his  Sun  withdraws,  he  has  feen  the 
1  Outaouas,  cifc.  'Tis  done,  ay,  'tis  done ;  the  Great  Spirit  is 
1  fatisfied  ;  my  Brethren  let  us  pluck  up  a  good  heart. 

We  muft  remark,  that  the  Women  likewife  make  Addreffes 
to  him,  and  that  commonly  when  the  Sun  rifes ;  upon  which 
Occafion  they  prefent  and  hold  up  their  Children  to  that  Lu- 
minary. When  the  Sun  is  almoft  down,  the  Warriors  march 
out  of  the  Village,  to  dance  the  Dance  of  the  Great  Spirit. 
But  after  all,  there  is  no  Day  or  Time  fix'd  for  thefe  Sacrifices, 
no  more  than  for  the  Particular  Dances.1 


1  The  method  and  manner  of  sacrifice  among  rhe  more  barbarous  North  American 
Indians  is  a  study  strewn  with  difficulties.  There  are  traces  of  human  sacrifice  among 
nearly  all  the  tribes  (see  Dorman,  Primitive  Superstitions,  pp.  208-213  ;  Jes.  Rel., 
x,  159-167),  but  Lahontan  is  doubtless  correct  in  asserting  that  it  was  not  usual. 
Dogs  were  frequently  sacrificed  to  the  dead  or  departing  spirits ;  but  the  more  ordinary 
offerings  were  food  and  tobacco,  and  there  does  not  appear  to  have  been  any  fixed 
time  for  or  form  of  sacrificial  ceremonial.  —  Ed. 


to  North- America.  451 


[34]     An  Account  of  the  Amours  and  Marriages   of  the 

Savages. 

I  COULD  recount  a  thoufand  Curious  Things  relating  to 
the  Courtfhip,  and  the  way  of  Marrying  among  the  Sava- 
ges ;  but  the  Relation  of  fo  many  Particulars,  would  be  too 
tedious ;  for  which  Reafon  I  mail  only  confine  my  felf  to  what 
is  mod  effential  to  that  Subject. 

It  may  be  juftly  faid,  That  the  Men  are  as  cold  and  indif- 
ferent as  the  Girls  are  paffionate  and  warm.  The  former  love 
nothing  but  War  and  Hunting,  and  their  utmoft  Ambition 
reaches  no  farther.  When  they  are  at  home,  and  have  noth- 
ing to  do,  they  run  with  the  Match ;  that  is,  they  are  Night- 
walkers.  The  Young  Men  do  not  marry  till  they  are  Thirty 
Years  of  Age,  for  they  pretend  that  the  Enjoyment  of  Women 
does  fo  enervate  'em,  that  they  have  not  the  fame  meafur  of 
Strength  to  undergo  great  Fatigues,  and  that  their  Hams  are 
too  weak  for  long  Marches,  or  quick  Purfuits :  In  purfuance 
of  this  Thought,  'tis  alledged,  That  thofe  who  have  married, 
or  ftroled  in  the  Nights  too  often,  are  taken  by  the  Iroquefe, 
by  reafon  of  the  Weaknefs  of  their  Limbs,  and  the  decay  of 
their  Vigour.  But  after  all,  we  muft  not  imagine  that  they 
live  chafte  till  that  Age ;  for  they  pretend  that  Exeeflive  Con- 
tinence occafions  Vapours,  Diforders  of  the  Kidneys,  and  a 


LlBftft, 


452  Some  New  Voyages 

Suppreflion  of  Urine ;  fo  that  'tis  neceffary  for  their  Health 
to  have  a  Run  once  a  Week. 

If  the  Savages  were  capable  of  being  fubjected  to  the 
Empire  of  Love,  they  muft  needs  have  an  Extraordinary  Com- 
mand of  themfelves  to  difguife  [35]  the  Juft  Jealoufie  they 
might  have  of  their  Miftreffes,  and  at  the  fame  time  to  carry 
it  fair  with  their  Rivals.  I  know  the  Humour  of  the  Savages 
better  than  a  great  many  French  People  that  have  liv'd  among 
'em  all  their  Life-time  ;  for  I  fludy'd  their  Cuftoms  fo  nar- 
rowly and  exactly,  that  all  their  Conduct  of  Life  is  as  per- 
fectly well  known  to  me,  as  if  I  had  been  among  'em  all  my 
Life-time  :  And  'tis  this  Exact  Knowledge  that  prompts  me  to 
fay,  That  they  are  altogether  Strangers  to  that  Blind  Fury 
which  we  call  Love.  They  content  themfelves  with  a  Tender 
Friendfhip,  that  is  not  liable  to  all  the  Extravagancies  that  the 
PafTion  of  Love  raifes  in  fuch  Breafts  as  harbour  it :  In  a 
word,  they  live  with  fuch  Tranquility,  that  one  may  call  their 
Love  Simple  Goodwill,  and  their  Difcretion  upon  that  Head 
is  unimaginable.  Their  Friendfhip  is  firm,  but  free  of  Tranf- 
port ;  for  they  are  very  careful  in  preferving  the  Liberty  and 
Freedom  of  their  Heart,  which  they  look  upon  as  the  raoft 
valuable  Treafure  upon  Earth :  From  whence  I  conclude  that 
they  are  not  altogether  fo  favage  as  we  are. 

The  Savages  never  quarrel  among  themfelves,  neither  do 
they  reproach  or  affront  one  another ;  One  man  among  them 
is  as  good  as  another,  for  all  are  upon  the  fame  Level.  They 
have  no  Diforders  occafion'd  by  a  Girl  or  a  Wife,  for  the 
Women  are  Wife,  and  fo  are  their  Husbands :    The  Girls 


to  North- America.  453 

indeed  are  a  little  foolifh,  and  the  Young  Men  play  the  fool 
with  them  not  unfrequently :  But  then  you  muft  confider  that 
a  Young  Woman  is  allow'd  to  do  what  fhe  pleafes;  let  her 
Conduct  be  what  it  will,  neither  Father  nor  Mother,  Brother 
nor  Sifter  can  pretend  to  controul  her.  A  Young  Woman, 
fay  they,  is  Mafter  of  her  own  Body,  and  by  her  Natural 
Right  of  Liberty  is  free  to  do  what  me  pleafes.  But  on  the 
other  [36]  hand  the  Married  Women  being  allow'd  the  Priv- 
iledge  of  quitting  their  Husbands  when  they  pleafe,  had  as 
good  be  dead  as  be  guilty  of  Adultery.  In  like  manner,  the 
Husbands  being  entituled  to  the  fame  Priviledge,  would  look 
upon  themfelves  as  infamous,  if  they  were  faithlefs  to  their 
Wives. 

Nothing  of  Intrigue  or  Courtfhip  muft  be  mention'd  to 
the  Savage  Ladies  in  the  Day  time,  for  they  will  not  hear  it ; 
they'll  tell  you  the  Night-time  is  the  moft  proper  feafon  for 
that ;  infomuch  that  if  a  Youth  fhould  by  chance  accoaft  a 
Girl  in  the  Day-time,  after  this  manner,  /  love  thee  more  than 
the  Light  of  the  Sun  (fuch  is  their  Phrafe)  liften  to  what  I  say, 
&fc.  (he  would  give  him  fome  Affront,  and  withdraw.  This  is 
a  general  Rule,  that  whoever  defigns  to  win  the  Affection  of 
a  Girl,  muft  fpeak  to  her  in  the  Day-time,  of  things  that  lie 
remote  from  the  Intrigues  of  Love.  One  may  converfe  with 
them  privately  as  long  as  he  will,  and  talk  of  a  thoufand 
Adventures  that  happen  every  minute,  upon  which  they  make 
their  Replies  very  pleafantly ;  for  you  cannot  imagine  what  a 
Gay  and  Jovial  Temper  they  are  of;  they  are  very  apt  to 
laugh,  and  that  with  a  very  engaging  Air.     'Tis  at  thefe  Pri- 


454  Some  New  Voyages 

vate  Interviews  that  the  Savages  fmell  out  the  Young  Womens 
Thoughts ;  for  though  the  Subject  of  their  Difcourfe  is  of  an 
Indifferent  Strain,  yet  they  talk  over  nicer  Subjects  in  the 
Language  of  their  Eyes.  After  a  Young  Man  has  paid  two 
or  three  Vifits  to  his  Miftrefs,  and  fancies  that  fhe  has  look'd 
upon  him  with  a  favourable  Eye,  he  takes  the  following 
Courfe  to  know  the  Truth  of  the  Matter. 

You  muft  take  notice,  that  forafmuch  as  the  Savages  are 
Strangers  to  Meum  and  Tuum,  to  Superiority  and  Subordina- 
tion ;  and  live  in  a  State  of  [37]  Equality  purfuant  to  the 
Principles  of  Nature ;  they  are  under  no  apprehenfion  of 
Robbers  or  Secret  Enemies,  fo  that  their  Huts  are  open 
Night  and  Day.  You  muft  know  farther,  that  Two  Hours 
after  Sun-fet,  the  Old  Superannuated  Perfons,  or  the  Slaves 
(who  never  lie  in  their  Matters  Huts)  take  care  to  cover  up 
the  Fire  before  they  go.  'Tis  then  that  the  Young  Savage 
comes  well  wrapt  up  to  his  Miftrefs's  Hut,  and  lights  a  fort 
of  a  Match  at  the  Fire ;  after  which  he  opens  the  Door  of  his 
Miftreffes  Apartment,  and  makes  up  to  her  Bed  :  If  fhe  blows 
out  the  Light,  he  lies  down  by  her ;  but  if  fhe  pulls  her  Cover- 
ing over  her  Face,  he  retires ;  that  being  a  Sign  that  fhe  will 
not  receive  him.  The  Young  Women  drink  the  Juice  of  cer- 
tain Roots,  which  prevents  their  Conception,  or  kills  the  Fruit 
of  the  Womb  ;  for  if  a  Girl  proves  with  Child,  fhe'll  never  get 
a  Husband.  They'll  fuffer  any  body  to  fit  upon  the  Foot  of 
their  Bed,  only  to  have  a  little  Chat ;  and  if  another  comes  an 
hour  after,  that  they  like,  they  do  not  ftand  to  grant  him  their 
laft  Favours.     As  to  this  Cuftom,  which  indeed  is  fingular, 


to  North- America.  455 

the  moft  fenfible  Savages  gave  this  Reafon  for  it,  That  they 
will  not  depend  upon  their  Lovers,  but  remove  all  ground  of 
Sufpicion  both  from  the  one  and  the  other,  that  fo  they  may 
act  as  they  pleafe. 

The  Savage  Women  like  the  French  better  than  their  own 
Countreymen,  by  reafon  that  the  former  are  more  prodigal  of 
their  Vigour,  and  mind  a  Woman's  Buiinefs  more  clofely.  In 
the  mean  time  the  Jefuits  ufe  all  Efforts  to  prevent  their  keep- 
ing Company  with  the  French :  They  have  Superannuated 
Fellows  placed  in  all  the  Huts,  who,  like  Faithful  Spies,  give 
an  Account  of  all  that  they  fee  or  hear.  The  French  who  have 
the  Misfortune  to  be  difcover'd,  are  publickly  nam'd  [38] 
in  the  Pulpit,  complain'd  of  to  the  Bifhop  and  the  Gov- 
ernor General,  excommunicated,  and  treated  as  Tranfgreffors 
of  the  Law :  But  after  all  the  Artifices  and  Oppofition  of  the 
Good  Fathers,  a  great  many  Intrigues  are  carried  on  in  the 
Villages,  that  they  know  nothing  of.  The  Jefuits  never  offer 
to  check  the  Young  Savages  for  keeping  company  with  Girls  ; 
for  if  they  offer'd  to  cenfure  their  Conduct,  and  ufe  'em  with 
the  fame  liberty  as  they  do  the  French,  they  would  tell  'em 
roundly,  that  they're  forry  the  Fathers  have  a  mind  to  their 
MiftrelTes.  This  was  the  Anfwer  that  a  Young  Huron  fpoke 
aloud  one  day  in  the  Church,  when  a  Jefuit  addrefling  himfelf 
to  him,  was  preaching  down  the  Night-Rambles  of  the  Sav- 
ages with  an  Apoftolical  Freedom. 

This  People  cannot  conceive  that  the  Europeans,  who  value 
themfelves  upon  their  Senfe  and  Knowledge,  mould  be  fo 
blind  and  fo  ignorant  as  not  to  know  that  Marriage  in  their 


456  Some  New  Voyages 

way  is  a  fource  of  Trouble  and  Uneafinefs.  To  be  ingag'd 
for  one's  Life  time,  to  them  is  matter  of  Wonder  and  Sur- 
prife.  They  look  upon  it  as  a  monftrous  thing  to  be  tied  one 
to  another  without  any  hopes  of  being  able  to  untie  or  break 
the  Knot.  In  fine,  in  fpite  of  all  the  Reafons  and  Arguments 
that  that  Subject  affords,  they  lay  down  this  for  a  firm  and 
unmoveable  Truth,  that  we  Eropeans  are  born  in  Slavery,  and 
deferve  no  other  Condition  than  that  of  Servitude. 

In  our  Country,  their  ftate  of  Marriage  would  be  juftly 
look'd  upon  as  a  Criminal  way  of  Converfation.  A  Savage 
(for  Inftance)  that  has  fignalis'd  himfelf  feveral  times  in  the 
Field,  and  acquir'd  the  Reputation  of  a  brave  Warrior,  hath  a 
mind  to  Marry  by  the  means  of  a  Contract,  or  rather  a  Leafe 
of  Thirty  Years,  with  the  hopes  of  feeing  in  his  old  Age  a 
Family  defcended  [39]  of  himfelf,  that  mail  provide  for  him. 
This  Hero  looks  out  for  an  agreeable  Girle,  and  after  he  and 
fhe  have  fettled  the  matter,  they  reveal  their  Defign  to  their 
Relations,  who  at  the  fame  time  cannot  oppofe  it,  but  are 
oblig'd  to  confent,  and  to  aflift  at  the  Ceremony.  They  meet 
together  in  the  Hut  of  the  ancienteft  Relation  or  Parent, 
where  a  Feaft  is  prepar'd  on  a  Day  fix'd  for  that  purpofe. 
Upon  fuch  Occafions  the  Company  is  very  numerous,  and 
the  Table  is  cover'd  with  all  manner  of  Dainties  in  a  very  pro- 
digal manner ;  and  thofe  who  aflift  at  the  Feftival,  Dance  and 
Sing,  and  perform  the  other  Diverfions  of  the  Country. 
After  the  Feafting  and  Merry-making  is  over,  all  the  Rela- 
tions of  the  Bridegroom  retire,  excepting  four  of  the  oldeft, 
after  which  the  Bride,  accompany'd  with  four  of  her  ancient- 


to  North- America.  457 

eft  Female  Relations,  appears  at  one  of  the  Doors  of  the  Hut, 
and  is  receiv'd  by  the  moft  decrepit  Man  of  the  Bridegroom's 
Company,  who  conducts  her  to  the  Bridegroom  at  a  certain 
place,  where  the  two  Parties  ftand  upright  upon  a  fine  Mat, 
holding  a  Rod  between  them,  while  the  old  Men  pronounce 
fome  fhort  Harangues.  In  this  Pofture  do  the  two  married 
Perfons  Harangue  one  after  another,  and  Dance  together, 
ringing  all  the  while,  and  holding  the  Rod  in  their  Hands, 
which  they  afterwards  break  into  as  many  pieces  as  there  are 
WitnefTes  to  the  Ceremony,  in  order  to  be  diftributed  among 
them.  This  done,  the  Bride  is  reconducted  out  of  the  Hut, 
where  the  young  Women  flay  for  her  to  accompany  her  to  her 
Father's  Apartment,  and  the  Bridegroom  or  married  Man  is 
oblig'd  to  go  there  to  find  her  when  he  has  a  mind  to  her 
Company,  till  fuch  time  as  fhe  brings  forth  a  Child  ;  then, 
indeed,  fhe  conveys  her  Cloaths  [40]  to  her  Husbands  Apart- 
ment, and  continues  with  him  till  the  Marriage  is  diffolv'd.1 

'Tis  allowable  both  for  the  Man  and  the  Woman  to  part 
when  they  pleafe.  Commonly  they  give  one  another  eight 
Days  Warning ;  fometimes  they  offer  Reafons  to  juftifie  their 
Conduct,  but  for  the  moft  part  the  ufual  Plea  is,  that  they  are 
fick  and  out  of  order,  and  that  Repofe  is  more  proper  for 
them  than  the  fatigue  of  a  married   Life.     Then  the  little 


1  Lahontan's  account  of  courtship,  and  the  ceremony  of  marriage,  is  more 
extended  than  those  of  other  early  travellers  ;  he  does  not,  however,  mention  a  prom- 
inent feature  of  the  transaction,  the  presents  given  to  the  father  of  the  bride,  consti- 
tuting a  sort  of  wife-purchase.  See  Jes.  Rel.,  iii,  p.  99;  Ixviii,  pp.  141-145.  Long 
and  Grant,  early  English  traders  among  the  Chippewa,  give  interesting  details  of 
courtship  and  marriage  in  that  tribe.  See  Thwaites,  Early  Western  Travels,  ii,  pp. 
J73-I75  !  Masson,  Bourgeois,  ii,  pp.  319-321.  —  Ed. 


458  Some  New  Voyages 

pieces  of  the  Rod  that  were  diftributed  among  the  Relations 
of  the  married  Perfons,  are  brought  into  that  Hut  in  which 
the  Marriage  was  Solemniz'd,  and  burnt  in  their  Prefence. 
You  rauft  obferve  that  this  Separation  is  accomplifh'd  without 
any  Difpute  or  Quarrel.  Both  the  Men  and  the  Women 
thus  unmarried  may  be  marry'd  again  to  whom  they  pleafe : 
But  commonly  they  lie  bye  three  or  fix  Months  before  they 
confummate  their  fecond  Marriage.  When  this  Separation 
happens  the  Children  are  divided  equally  between  them,  for 
the  Children  are  the  Treafure  of  the  Savages.  If  their  num- 
ber be  odd  the  Woman  hath  the  better  half. 

Though  they  are  at  their  liberty  to  change,  yet  there  are 
feveral  Savages  that  live  all  their  Life  time  with  one  Woman. 
I  gave  you  to  know  above,  that  during  the  whole  courfe  of 
their  married  State  they  maintain  an  inviolable  Fidelity  to  one 
another:  But,  which  is  yet  more  Edifying,  as  foon  as  the 
Woman  is  declar'd  to  be  with  Child,  both  (he  and  her  Bedfel- 
low abftain  from  Enjoyment,  and  obferve  an  exact  courfe  of 
Continence  from  thence  to  the  thirtieth  Day  after  her  Child- 
birth. When  a  Woman  is  ready  to  lye  in,  fhe  withdraws  to  a 
certain  Hut  allotted  for  that  ufe,  being  attended  by  her  fhe 
Slaves,  who  ferve  and  aflift  her  as  far  as  they  can.  In  [41] 
fine,  the  Female  Sex  in  this  Country  deliver  themfelves  with- 
out the  afliftance  of  Midwives  ;  for  they  bring  forth  their 
Children  with  a  facility  that  the  European  Women  can  fcarce 
have  any  Notion  of,  and  they  never  lye  in  above  two  or  three 
Days.  They  obferve  a  fort  of  Purification  for  thirty  Days  if 
the  Child  be  a  Boy,  and  for  forty  if  it  be  a  Girle,  and  till  that 


to  TVtfr^-America.  459 

time  is  expir'd  they  do  not  return  to  their  Husband's  Apart- 
ment. 

As  foon  as  their  Children  come  into  the  World  they  dip 
them  in  warm  Water  up  to  the  Chin,  after  which  they  fwathe 
them  down  upon  little  Boards  or  Planks  fluffed  with  Cotton, 
where  they  lye  upon  their  Backs,  as  I  infinuated  under  the 
Head  of  the  Habit,  Houfes,  &c.  of  the  Savages.  They  never 
make  ufe  of  Nurfes  unlefs  it  be  when  the  Mothers  are  out  of 
order,  and  they  never  wean  their  Children,  but  fuckle  them  fo 
long  as  they  have  Milk,  with  which  indeed  they  are  very  plen- 
tifully provided. 

The  Women  have  no  opportunity  of  Marriage  after  the 
Fiftieth  Year  of  their  Age ;  for  the  Men  of  the  like  Age 
alledge,  that  fince  they  cannot  then  bear  Children,  'twould  be 
a  piece  of  Folly  to  meddle  with  them ;  and  the  young  Sparks 
affirm,  that  their  wither'd  Beauty  has  not  force  enough  to 
Charm  them,  at  a  time  when  there  is  no  fcarcity  of  Buxfome 
young  Girles.  In  this  Diftrefs,  when  the  young  Men  will  not 
ufe  them  as  Miftrefles,  and  Men  of  riper  Years  refufe  them 
for  Wives,  if  their  Complexion  be  any  thing  Amorous,  they 
are  forc'd  to  adopt  fome  Prifoner  of  War  that  is  prefented 
them,  in  order  to  anfwer  their  preffing  Neceffities. 

When  the  Husband  or  Wife  comes  to  dye,  the  Widow- 
hood does  not  laft  above  fix  Months ;  and  if  in  that  fpace  of 
time  the  Widow  or  Widower  [42]  dreams  of  their  deceas'd 
Bedfellow,  they  Poyfon  themfelves  in  cold  Blood  with  all  the 
Contentment  imaginable ;  and  at  the  fame  time  fing  a  fort  of 
tune  that  one  may  fafely  fay  proceeds  from  the  Heart.     But 


460  Some  New  Voyages 

if  the  furviving  Party  dreams  but  once  of  the  Deceafed,  they 
fay,  that  the  Spirit  of  Dreams  was  not  fure  that  the  dead  Per- 
fon  was  uneafie  in  the  Country  of  Souls,  forafmuch  as  he  only 
pafs'd  by  without  returning,  and  for  that  reafon  they  think 
they  are  not  oblig'd  to  go  keep  him  Company.1 

Thefe  Savages  are  uncapable  of  Jealoufy  ;  that  is  a  Paffion 
they  know  nothing  of.  They  jeer  the  Europeans  upon  that 
head ;  and  brand  a  man's  diftruft  of  his  Wife,  for  a  piece  of 
manifeft  Folly ;  as  if,  fay  they,  we  were  not  certain  that  'tis 
impoffible  for  fo  weak  an  Animal  to  be  true  to  its  promifes. 
To  purfue  their  fallacious  way  of  arguing,  they  alledge  that 
fufpicion  is  only  a  doubt,  and  that  to  doubt  of  what  one  fees 
is  an  argument  of  Blindnefs  and  Folly ;  and  in  fine,  that  'tis 
impoflible,  but  that  the  conftraint  and  perpetuity  that  attends 
our  Marriages,  or  the  bait  of  Gold  and  Silver,  mould  oblige 
a  Woman  when  Cloy'd  with  one  and  the  fame  Husband,  to 
whet  her  Appetite  in  the  Embraces  of  another  Man*  I  am 
fully  convinced  that  a  Savage  would  chufe  rather  to  fuffer 
Mutilation  than  to  Embrace  his  Neighbours  Wife.  Nor  is 
the  Chaftity  of  the  me  Savages  lefs  nice,  for  I  do  not  believe 
that  in  the  fpace  of  Fifty  Years  there  has  been  one  Inftance 
among  'em  of  the  Invafion  of  another  Man's  Bed.2     'Tis  true 


1  The  influence  of  dreams  is  one  or  the  most  marked  superstitions  of  the  Indians. 
They  are  regarded  as  divine  intimations,  whose  suggestions  must  be  followed  even  to 
the  extent  of  suicide  and  death.  The  influence  of  "  medicine  men  "  was  largely  per- 
petuated by  means  of  this  belief  in  dreams.     See  post.  —  Ed 

2  Among  the  Western  Indians  adultery  was  punished  by  mutilation,  and  even  by 
death.  Consult  Jes.  Rel.,  xlv,  p.  237  ;  liv,  p.  187  ;  Wis.  Hist.  Colls.,  xvi,  pp.  362, 
375  ;  Thwaites,  Hennepin's  Ne-zv  Discovery,  pp.  482,  483.  —  Ed. 


to  North- America.  461 

the  French,  being  uncapable  to  diftinguifh  between  the  Mar- 
ried and  Unmarried  Women,  fometimes  make  their  Addrefs 
to  the  former,  when  they  find  them  alone  in  the  Woods,  or 
when  they  walk  out  into  the  Fields ;  but  upon  such  occafions 
they  always  receive  this  Anfwer;  [43]  The  Fiend  which  is 
before  mine  Eyes  hinders  me  to  fee  thee. 

The  Savages  go  always  by  the  Mothers  Name.  To 
make  this  plain  by  an  example:  the  Leader  of  the  Nation  of 
Hurons,  who  is  called  Saflaretfi?  being  Married  to  a  Daughter 
of  another  Huron  Family,  by  whom  he  has  feveral  Children, 
that  General's  Name  is  extind  at  his  Death,  for  that  his 
Children  affume  the  Name  of  the  Mother.  Now,  it  may  be 
ask'd  how  the  Name  of  Saflaretfi  has  been  kept  up  for  the 
fpace  of  Seven  or  Eight  Hundred  Years  among  that  People, 
and  is  likely  to  continue  to  future  Ages?  But  the  Queftion 
is  eafily  Anfwered,  if  we  confider,  that  the  Sifter  of  this 
Saflaretfi  being  Married  to  another  Savage,  whom  we  mail 
call  Adario,  the  Children  Springing  from  that  Marriage,  will 
be  called  Saflaretfi  after  the  Mother,  and  not  Adario  after  this 
Father.  When  I  asked  them  the  Reafon  of  the  Cuftom,  they 
replyed,  that  the  Children  having  received  their  Soul  from 
their  Father,  and  their  Body  from  their  Mother,  'twas  but 


1The  family  of  Sastaretsi  were  the  hereditary  chiefs  of  the  nation  of  the  Tobacco 
or  Petun  Hurons  (see  p.  54,  note  2,  ante) .  They  belonged  to  the  deer  clan  (or 
totem)  of  this  tribe,  and  exercised  their  authority  until  1794,  when,  at  Wayne's  battle 
of  Fallen  Timbers,  this  clan  was  almost  annihilated,  A  chieftain  of  this  name  treated 
with  the  French  in  1682  (N.  Y.  Colon.  Docs.,  ix,  p.  178);  another  died  at  Quebec 
in  1746,  and  by  that  means  precipitated  the  Huron  revolt  under  Chief  Nicholas 
(see  Wis.  Hist.  Colls.,  xvii).  The  Sastaretsi  were  commonly  faithful  to  the  French 
alliance.  —  Ed. 


462  Some  New  Voyages 

reafonable  that  the  Maternial  Name  mould  be  perpetuated. 
I  reprefented  to  them  I  do  not  know  how  often,  that  God 
alone  was  the  only  Creator  of  Souls,  and  that  it  was  more 
reafonable  to  derive  the  original  of  that  Cuftom  from  the 
certainty  that  they  had  of  the  Mother  beyond  that  of  the 
Father;  but  they  positively  affirmed  that  this  reafon  was 
abfurd,  without  offering  any  proof.1 

When  a  Woman  has  loft  a  Husband  that  leaves  Brothers 
who  are  Batchelours,  one  of  thefe  Marries  the  Widow  Six 
Months  after  his  Death,  The  fame  is  the  Cafe  with  the 
Sifters  of  a  Wife;  for  when  a  Married  Woman  Dies,  com- 
monly one  of  the  Sifters  fupplies  her  place.  But  you  muft 
take  notice  that  this  Cuftom  is  only  obferved  by  the  Savages 
that  pretend  to  be  Wifer  than  their  [44]  Neighbours.  Some 
Savages  continue  Batchelours  to  their  Dying  day,  and  never 
appear  either  at  Hunting  or  in  Warlike  Expeditions,  as  being 
either  Lunatick  or  Sickly :  But  at  the  fame  time  they  are  as 
much  efteem'd  as  the  Braveft  and  Haileft  Men  in  the  Country, 
or  at  leaft  if  they  rally  upon  'em,  'tis  never  done  where  they 
are  prefent.  Among  the  Illinefe  there  are  feveral  Hermaphro- 
dites, who  go  in  a  Woman's  Habit,  but  frequent  the  Com- 
pany of  both  Sexes.2  Thefe  Illinefe  are  ftrangely  given  to 
Sodomy,  as  well  as  the  other  Savages  that  live  near  the  River 
MiJJifipi, 

1  This  custom  of  naming  children  was  used  in  support  of  the  theory  of  mutterrecht 
as  a  basis  of  ancient  family  institutions.  See  Morgan,  Ancient  Society  (New  York, 
1877);   McLennan,  Patriarchal  Theory  (London,  1885).  —  Ed. 

2  See  Marquette's  description  of  the  class  called  "  berdashes,"  in  Jes.  Rel  ,  lix, 
pp.  129,  309,  310.  —  Ed. 


to  N orth- hmznca..  463 

This,  Sir,  is  all  that  I  could  learn  of  the  way  of  Marriage 
and  the  Amours  of  the  Americans;  who  are  fo  far  from  giving 
a  full  loofe  to  their  Venerial  Appetite,  that  they  always  act 
with  a  command  over  themfelves,  being  very  moderate  in 
their  Adventures  with  Women,  whom  they  make  ufe  of  only 
for  the  Propagation  of  their  Families  and  the  Prefervation  of 
their  Health.  Their  Conduct  upon  this  Head  may  ferve  for 
a  juft  Reprimand  to  the  Europeans. 

I  obferv'd  before,  that  if  once  a  Girle  proves  with  Child, 
fhe  never  gets  a  Husband ;  but  I  ought  to  have  added  that 
fome  young  Women  will  not  hear  of  a  Husband,  through 
a  principle  of  Debauchery.  That  fort  of  Women  are  call'd 
Ickoue  ne  Kioujfa,  i,  e.  Hunting  Women :  for  they  commonly 
accompany  the  Huntfmen  in  their  Diversions.  To  juftify 
their  Conduct,  they  alledge  that  they  find  themfelves  to  be  of 
too  indifferent  a  temper  to  brook  the  Conjugal  yoak,  to  be 
too  carelefs  for  the  bringing  up  of  Children,  and  too  impa- 
tient to  bear  the  pafling  of  the  whole  Winter  in  the  Villages. 
Thus  it  is,  that  they  cover  and  difguife  their  Lewdnefs.  Their 
Parents  or  Relations  dare  not  cenfure  their  Vicious  Conduct ; 
on  the  contrary  they  feem  to  approve  of  it,  in  [45]  declaring, 
as  I  faid  before,  that  their  Daughters  have  the  command  of 
their  own  Bodies  and  may  difpofe  of  their  Perfons  as  they 
think  fit ;  they  being  at  their  liberty  to  do  what  they  pleafe. 
In  fhort,  the  Children  of  thefe  Common  Women  are  accounted 
a  Lawful  Iffue,  and  intitled  to  all  the  Privileges  of  other 
Children ;  abateing  for  one  thing,  namely,  that  the  noted 
Warriours  or  Counfellours  will  not  accept  of  "em  for  their 


464  Some  New  Voyages 

Sons  in  Law,  and  that  they  cannot  enter  into  Alliance  with 
certain  Ancient  Families ;  though  at  the  fame  time  thefe 
Families  are  not  poffeffed  of  any  peculiar  Right  or  Prehem- 
inence.  The  Jefuits  do  their  utmoft  to  prevent  the  Lewd 
Practices  of  thefe  Whores,  by  Preaching  to  their  Parents  that 
their  Indulgence  is  very  difagreeable  to  the  Great  Spirit,  that 
they  muft  anfwer  before  God  for  not  confineing  their  Children 
to  the  meafures  of  Continency  and  Chaftity,  and  that  a  Fire  is 
Kindled  in  the  other  World  to  Torment  'em  for  ever,  unlefs 
they  take  more  care  to  correct  Vice. 

To  fuch  Remonftrances  the  Men  reply,  That's  Admirable; 
and  the  Women  ufually  tell  the  Good  Fathers  in  a  deriding 
way,  That  if  their  Threats  be  well  grounded,  the  Mountains  of  the 
other  World  muft  confift  of  the  A  flies  of  fouls. 


to  North-America..  465 


A  View  of  the  Difeafes  and  Remedies  of  the  Savages. 

THE  Savages  are  a  robuft  and  vigorous  fort  of  People,  of 
a  Sanguine  Temperament,  and  an  admirable  Com- 
plexion. They  are  unacquainted  with  a  great  many  Difeafes 
that  afflicl:  [46]  the  Europeans,  fuch  as  the  Gout,  Gravel, 
Dropsy,  &c.  Their  Health  is  firm,  notwithstanding  that  they 
ufe  no  precaution  to  preferve  it ;  for  on  the  contrary  one 
would  think  that  they  weaken  themfelves  by  the  Violent  Exer- 
cifes  of  Dancing,  Hunting,  and  Warlike-Expeditions,  in  which 
they  have  frequent  returns  of  Heats  and  Colds  in  one  day, 
which  in  Europe  would  occafion  a  Mortal  Diftemper.  Some- 
times indeed  they  are  feiz'd  with  Plurifies,  but  thefe  are  as 
unfrequent  as  they  are  mortal ;  for  this  is  the  only  Diftemper 
that  all  their  Remedies  cannot  conquer.  The  Small-Pox  are 
as  common  in  the  North  of  Canada,  as  the  Great-Pox  are  to  the 
Southward :  in  the  Winter  time  the  Small-Pox  is  very  danger- 
ous, by  reafon  of  the  difficulty  of  refpiration ;  but  notwith- 
standing that  'tis  mortal,  the  Savages  matter  it  fo  little,  that 
when  'tis  upon  'em,  they  walk  about  from  Hut  to  Hut,  if  they 
are  able ;  or  if  they  have  not  ftrength  to  walk,  are  carried 
about  by  their  Slaves.  In  the  Illinefe  Country,  and  near  the 
Mifjifipi,  the  Venereal  Diftemper  is  very  common.  I  remember, 
that  in  the  Interview  I  had  with  the  Akanfas  upon  that  great 

30 


466  Some  New  Voyages 

River,  at  the  Mouth  of  the  Miffouris  (as  I  faid  in  my  Sixteenth 
Letter)  I  faw  a  Savage,  who  uncovering  himfelf,  fhew'd  me 
part  of  his  Body,  that  was  ready  to  fall  off,  through  Rotten- 
nefs ;  at  that  time  he  was  bufy'd  in  boiling  Roots,  and  after  I 
had  ask'd  him  the  ufe  of  'em,  he  gave  me  to  understand  by 
his  Interpreter,  that  he  hop'd  to  be  cur'd  in  a  Months  time, 
by  drinking  the  Juice  of  thefe  Roots,  and  eating  constantly 
the  Broth  or  Decoction  of  Meat  and  Fifh. 

Brandy  makes  a  terrible  havock  among  the  People  of 
Canada,  for  thofe  who  drink  it  are  much  more  numerous  than 
thofe  who  have  the  power  to  abftain  from  it.  That  Liquor, 
which  of  it  felf  is  murdering  ftuff,  and  which  is  brew'd  and 
adulterated  [47]  before  'tis  imported  into  this  Countrey, 
fweeps  off  men  fo  faft,  that  one  who  has  not  feen  the  fatal 
effects  of  it  can  fcarce  credit  'em  :  It  extinguifhes  their  Nat- 
ural Heat,  and  throws  almoft  all  of  'em  into  that  Languishing 
Diforder,  which  we  call  a  Confumption  :  They  look  pale,  livid 
and  ghaftly  like  Skeletons.1  Their  Feafts  are  the  bane  and 
entire  ruine  of  their  Stomacks,  as  being  nothing  but  plentiful 
Entertainments,  at  which  they  value  themfelves  upon  leaving 
nothing.2  They  pretend,  that  by  vertue  of  their  drinking 
great  quantities  of  Water  and  Broth,  they  digeft  their  Victuals 


1  The  ravages  of  the  liquor  habit  among  the  aborigines  of  North  America  are 
well-known.  The  Indians  do  not  drink  for  the  taste  of  the  liquor  itself,  but  for  the 
effect  it  produces  — intoxication  constituting  a  great  enjoyment,  for  which  they  will 
sacrifice  much.  They  do  not  hold  anyone  responsible  for  acts  committed  in  that  state 
—  see  vol.  i,  p.  124,  ante.  The  early  Jesuits  opposed  the  brandy  trade  with  the 
Indians,  but  were  unable  to  secure  its  prohibition  —  see  ibid.,  p.  94.  —  Ed. 

2  The  "  eat-all  "  feasts  were  among  the  most  marked  and  disgusting  habits  of  the 
Indians.     See  Le  Jeune's  description  in  Jes.  Rel.,  vi,  pp.  281-293.— Ed. 


to  North- America.  467 

with  greater  Facility  than  the  Europeans,  who  load  their  Stom- 
acks  with  Wine  and  other  Liquors,  that  produce  Crudities. 

The  Savages  are  not  at  all  alarm'd  by  Sicknefs,  for  they 
fear  Death  much  lefs  than  the  Pain  and  Duration  of  their 
Illnefs.  When  they  are  fick,  they  only  drink  Broth,  and  eat 
fparingly  ;  and  if  they  have  the  good  luck  to  fall  afleep,  they 
think  themfelves  cur'd  :  They  have  told  me  frequently,  that 
fleeping  and  fweating  would  cure  the  moft  ftubborn  Difeafes  in 
the  World.  When  they  are  fo  weak  that  they  cannot  get  out 
of  Bed,  their  Relations  come  and  dance  and  make  merry  before 
'em,  in  order  to  divert  'em.  To  conclude,  when  they  are  ill,  they 
are  always  vifited  by  a  fort  of  Quacks,  (Jongleurs);  of  whom 
'twill  now  be  proper  to  fubjoin  two  or  three  Words  by  the  bye. 

A  Jongleur  is  a  fort  of  Phyfician,  or  rather  a  Quack,  who 
being  once  cur'd  of  fome  dangerous  Diftemper,  has  the  Pre- 
emption and  Folly  to  fancy  that  he  is  immortal,  and  poffeffed 
of  the  Power  of  curing  all  Difeafes,  by  fpeaking  to  the  Good 
and  Evil  Spirits.  Now  though  every  Body  rallies  upon  thefe 
Fellows  when  they  are  abfent,  and  looks  upon  'em  as  Fools 
that  have  loft  their  Senfes  by  [48]  fome  violent  Diftemper, 
yet  they  allow  'em  to  vifit  the  Sick ;  whether  it  be  to  divert 
'em  with  their  Idle  Stories,  or  to  have  an  Opportunity  of 
feeing  them  rave,  skip  about,  cry,  houl,  and  make  Grimaces 
and  Wry  Faces,  as  if  they  were  poffefs'd.  When  all  the  Buftle 
is  over,  they  demand  a  Feaft  of  a  Stag  and  fome  large  Trouts 
for  the  Company,  who  are  thus  regal'd  at  once  with  Diverfion 
and  Good  Cheer. 

When  the  Quack  comes  to  vifit  the  Patient,  he  examines 


468  Some  New  Voyages 

him  very  carefully  ;  //  the  Evil  Spirit  be  here,  fays  he,  we  /hall 
quickly  dijlodge  him.  This  faid,  he  withdraws  by  himfelf  to  a 
little  Tent  made  on  purpofe,  where  he  dances  and  fings  houl- 
ing  like  an  Owl ;  (which  gives  the  Jefuits  Occafion  to  fay, 
That  the  Devil  converfes  with  'em.)  After  he  has  made  an  end 
of  this  Quack  Jargon,  he  comes  and  rubs  the  Patient  in  fome 
part  of  his  Body,  and  pulling  fome  little  Bones  out  of  his 
Mouth,  acquaints  the  Patient,  That  thefe  very  Bones  came  out  of 
his  Body  ;  that  he  ought  to  pluck  up  a  good  heart,  in  regard  that  his 
Dijlemper  is  but  a  Trifle  ;  and  in  fine,  that  in  order  to  accelerate  the 
Cure,  'twill  be  convenient  to  fend  his  own  and  his  Relations  Slaves 
to  fhoot  Elks,  Deer,  &c.  to  the  end  they  may  all  eat  of  that  fort  of 
Meat,  upon  which  his  Cure  does  abfolutely  depend. 

Commonly  thefe  Quacks  bring  'em  fome  Juices  of  Plants, 
which  are  a  fort  of  Purges,  and  are  called  Maskikik.  But  the 
Patients  choofe  to  keep  them  by  'em  rather  than  to  drink 
them ;  for  they  think  all  Purgatives  inflame  the  Mafs  of  the 
Blood,  and  weaken  the  Veins  and  Arteries  by  their  violent 
Shocks.  All  their  Cure  confifts  in  fweating  well,  in  drinking 
Broth,  in  keeping  themfelves  very  warm,  in  fleeping  if  they 
can,  and  in  drinking  the  Lake-water  or  Spring-water,  in  the 
Paroxyfms  of  Fevers,  as  well  as  in  other  Diftempers.1 


1  There  is  a  large  literature  on  the  subject  of  "  medicine  men  "  and  their  thera- 
peutics. There  appear  to  have  been  two  classes  of  these  practitioners  :  those  of  the 
rational  school,  who  depended  for  their  cures  upon  herbs,  baths,  etc.;  and  the  mystics 
or  conjurers,  who  sought  by  religious  ceremonies  to  expel  the  unwelcome  manitou  from 
the  patient.  For  observations  of  ethnological  students,  see  Jes.  Ret.,  index  ;  Masson, 
Bourgeois,  ii,  p.  259-265,  363  ;  Hoffman,  "  Midewinin  of  the  Ojibwa,"  in  U.  S.  Bur. 
of  Eth.  Report,  1885-86  ;  Bourke,  "  Medicine  Men  of  the  Apache,"  ibid,  1887-88  ; 
also  Brinton,  Myths,  pp.  304-328.  —  Ed. 


to  North- America.  469 

[49]  They  cannot  conceive  how  we  come  to  be  fuch  Fools 
as  to  make  ufe  of  Vomits ;  for  when  ever  they  fee  a  French- 
man take  down  fuch  a  violent  Remedy,  they  cannot  forbear 
faying  that  he  fwallows  an  Iroquefe.  They  plead,  that  this  fort 
of  Remedy  fhakes  the  whole  Machine,  and  makes  terrible 
Efforts  upon  all  the  inward  Parts.  But  they  are  yet  more 
aftonifh'd  at  our  cuftom  of  Bleeding ;  For,  fay  they,  the  Blood 
being  the  Taper  of  Life,  we  have  more  occafion  to  pour  it  in  than  to 
take  out,  confidering  that  Life  finks  when  its  Principal  Caufe  is 
mov'd  off ;  from  whence  'tis  a  Natural  Confequence,  that  after  lofs 
of  Blood  Nature  afls  but  feebly  and  heavily,  the  Intrails  are  over- 
heated, and  all  the  Parts  are  dry'd,  which  gives  rife  to  all  the  Dif- 
eafes  that  afflicl  the  Europeans. 

The  Savages  are  never  eight  Days  together  without  Sweat- 
ing, whether  they  be  well  or  bad ;  only  they  obferve  this  dif- 
ference, that  when  they  are  perfectly  well  they  throw  them- 
felves  while  the  fweating  moifture  is  yet  upon  them,  into  the 
River  in  Summer,  and  into  the  Snow  in  Winter  ;  whereas  when 
they  are  out  of  order  they  go  immediately  into  a  warm  Bed. 
Five  or  fix  Savages  may  fweat  conveniently  in  the  place  allotted 
for  that  ufe,  which  is  a  fort  of  Oven  or  Stove  cover'd  with 
Mats,  Skins,  cifc.  In  the  middle  of  this  Bagnio  there  ftands 
a  Dim  or  Porringer  full  of  burning  Brandy,  or  of  great  red 
hot  Stones,  which  occafions  fuch  a  piercing  heat,  that  in  the 
twinkling  of  an  Eye  they  fweat  prodigioufly.1     They  never 


1The  sweat  houses  of  the  Indians  are  familiar  to  all  students  of  aboriginal  life  ; 
they  were  used  both  in  sickness  and  in  health.  For  a  good  description  see  Jes.  Rel., 
vi,  pp.  189,  191  ;  xxxviii,  pp.  253,  255.  —  Ed. 


470  Some  New  Voyages 

make  ufe  of  hot  Baths  and  Glyfters,  unlefs  it  be  when  they  are 
over  perfwaded  by  the  Jefuits  and  our  Phyficians. 

I  remember,  that  in  a  Conference  I  had  one  Day  with  a 
Savage,  the  Barbarian  faid  with  a  great  deal  of  Senfe,  That  a 
good  Air,  good  Water,  and  Contentment  of  Mind  could  not  indeed 
keep  a  [50]  Man's  Life  from  coming  to  an  end,  but  that  at  leaft  it 
muft  be  own'd,  that  thefe  Advantages  contribute  in  a  great  meafure 
to  make  a  Man  run  through  the  eourfe  of  his  Life  without  being 
fenfible  of  any  Diforder  or  Inconveniecy.  They  make  a  Jeft  of  the 
Impatience  of  the  Europeans,  who  would  be  cur'd  as  foon  as 
they  are  fick.  They  alledge  that  our  fear  of  Death,  occafion'd 
by  the  invafion  of  the  leaft  Feaver,  does  fo  inflame  and  fortifie 
the  Difeafe,  that  oftentimes  we  fall  a  Sacrifice  to  Fear  it  felf ; 
whereas  if  we  look'd  upon  our  Illnefs  as  a  Triffle  as  well  as 
Death,  and  kept  our  Bed  with  Patience  and  a  good  Heart, 
without  offering  Violence  to  Nature,  by  cramming  down 
Drugs  and  Medicines,  the  good  old  Dame  would  not  fail  to 
Comfort  and  Refrefh  us  by  degrees. 

The  Savages  are  always  againft  the  making  ufe  of  our 
Surgeons  and  Phyficians.  They  affirm,  that  all  mixtures  cf 
Drugs  are  Poyfon  that  deftroys  Natural  Heat,  and  confumes 
the  Breaft ;  and  that  Glyfters  are  only  proper  for  the  Euro- 
peans, though  after  all  they  fometimes  make  ufe  of  them, 
when  the  French  refort  to  their  Villages.  They  are  of  the 
Opinion,  that  the  obferving  of  a  Diet  heats  the  Blood,  and 
that  'tis  of  dangerous  Confequence  to  baulk  the  Appetite  as 
to  what  it  craves,  provided  the  Aliment  hath  a  good  Juice. 
The  Meat  that  they  eat  is  little  more  than  half  done;  but 


to  North- America.  471 

their  Fifh  is  always  over  boyl'd.  They  never  touch  Sallade, 
upon  the  Plea  that  all  cold  Herbs  oblige  the  Stomach  to 
hard  labour. 

There's  no  Wound  or  Diflocation  that  they  cannot  cure 
with  the  Simples  or  Plants,  whofe  Vertues  they  are  well  ac- 
quainted with  ;  and,  which  indeed  is  fingular,  their  Wounds 
never  run  to  a  Gangrene.  But  after  all,  this  is  not  to  [51] 
be  imputed  to  thefe  Herbs,  nor  to  the  Air  of  the  Country, 
but  to  their  hail  Conftitution ;  for  notwithstanding  the  ufe  of 
thefe  very  Remedies  a  Gangrene  invades  the  Wounds  of  the 
French,  who  queftionlefs  are  harder  to  cure  than  the  Savages. 
This  People  attribute  our  liablenefs  to  Gangrenes,  and  indeed 
all  our  Difeafes,  to  the  Salt  that  we  eat ;  for  they  cannot  tafte 
any  fait  thing  without  being  Tick  unto  Death,  and  drinking 
perpetually.  They  cannot  be  perfwaded  to  drink  Ice-water, 
for  they  alledge  that  it  infeebles  the  Stomach,  and  retards 
Digeftion.  Such,  Sir,  are  their  fantaftical  Opinions  of  things, 
which  proceed  from  their  Prepoffeflion  and  Bigotry  with  ref- 
erence to  their  own  Cuftoms  and  ways  of  Living.  'Tis  in 
vain  to  vifit  them  when  they  lie  at  the  point  of  Death,  in  order 
to  prefs  them  to  Bleed  or  take  a  Purge ;  for  they  ftill  make 
anfwer,  that  they  cannot  confent  to  the  forwarding  of  their 
Death  by  the  Remedies  of  the  French,  which  they  take  to  be 
as  bad  as  the  Perfons  who  exhibit  them. 

As  foon  as  a  Savage  dies  he  is  dreft  as  neatly  as  can  be, 
and  his  Relations  Slaves  come  and  mourn  over  him ;  neither 
Mother,  Sifter  nor  Brother  mews  the  leaft  mark  of  Affliction ; 
they  fay,  Their  deceas'd  Friend   is  happy  in  being  thus  ex- 


472  Some  New  Voyages 

empted  from  farther  Sufferings;  for  this  good  People  believe, 
and  not  without  Reafon,  that  Death  is  a  paffage  to  a  better 
Life.1  When  the  Corps  are  dreft  they  fet  them  upon  a  Mat 
in  the  fame  Pofture  as  if  the  Perfon  were  alive ;  and  his  Rela- 
tions being  fet  round  him,  every  one  in  his  turn  addreffes  him 
with  a  Harangue,  recounting  all  his  Exploits  as  well  as  thofe 
of  his  Anceftors.  He  that  fpeaks  laft  expreffes  himfelf  to  this 
purpofe.  '  You  fuch  a  one,  you  fit  now  along  with  us,  and 
'  have  the  fame  Shapes  that  [52]  we  have;  you  want  neither 
1  Arms,  nor  Head,  nor  Legs.  But  at  the  fame  time  you  ceafe 
1  to  be,  and  begin  to  evaporate  like  the  fmoke  of  a  Pipe. 
1  Who  is  it  that  talk'd  with  us  but  two  Days  ago  ?  Sure ! 
'  'twas  not  you  ;  for  then  you  would  fpeak  to  us  ftill.  It  muft 
1  therefore  be  your  Soul  which  is  now  lodg'd  in  the  great 
'  Country  of  Souls  along  with  thofe  of  our  Nation.  This 
1  Body  which  we  now  behold  will  in  fix  Months  time  become 
4  what  it  was  two  Hundred  Years  ago.  Thou  feeleft  nothing, 
(  thou  knoweft  nothing,  and  thou  feeft  nothing,  becaufe  thou 
'  art  nothing.  Neverthelefs  out  of  the  Friendfhip  we  had  for 
'  thy  Body  while  animated  by  thy  Spirit,  we  thus  tender  the 
'  Marks  of  that  Veneration  which  is  due  to  our  Brethren  and 
1  our  Friends. 

After  they  have  made  an  end  of  their  Harangues  the  Male 
Relations  remove  to   make   room   for  the  fhe   Friends,  who 


1  All  tribes  of  North  American  Indians  appear  to  have  entertained  some  form  of 
belief  in  the  future  life.  See  Brinton,  Myths,  pp.  271-278.  The  Jesuits  describe  the 
mourning  and  wailing  consequent  upon  death,  but  assert  that  it  is  largely  customary 
rather  than  the  expression  of  grief.  They  likewise  mention  the  funeral  orations.  See 
Le  Jeune,  in  Jes.  Rel.,  x,  pp.  265-277.  —  Ed. 


to  North-America..  473 

make  him  the  like  Compliment.  This  done,  they  fhut  the 
Corps  up  twenty  four  Hours  in  the  Hut  for  the  Dead,  and 
during  that  time  are  imploy'd  in  Dances  and  Feafts,  which  are 
far  from  bearing  a  mournful  fhew.  After  the  twenty  four 
Hours  are  expir'd  the  Slaves  of  the  deceas'd  Perfon  carry  his 
Corps  upon  their  Backs  to  the  Burying-place,  where  it  is  laid 
upon  Stakes  that  are  ten  Foot  high,  in  a  double  Coffin  of 
Bark,  with  his  Arms  and  fome  Pipes  with  Tobaco  and  Indian 
Corn  put  up  in  the  fame  Coffin.  When  the  Slaves  are  carry- 
ing the  Corps  to  the  Burying-place,  the  Male  and  Female 
Relations  accompany  them,  Dancing  all  the  while ;  and  the 
reft  of  the  Slaves  of  the  deceas'd  Perfon  carry  fome  Bag- 
gage, which  the  Relations  prefent  to  the  dead  Perfon  and  lay 
upon  his  Coffin.  The  Savages  that  live  upon  the  long  River 
burn  their  Corps,  as  I  infinuated  before;  [53]  but  you  muft 
know  that  they  keep  them  in  Vaults  or  Cellars  till  they  have 
a  fufficient  number  to  burn  together,  which  is  perform'd  out 
of  the  Village,  in  a  place  fet  a  part  for  that  Ceremony.1  In 
fine,  the  Savages  know  no  fuch  thing  as  Mourning,  and  never 
mention  the  Dead  in  particular;  I  mean,  they  never  repeat 
their  Names.2  They  deride  us  when  they  hear  us  recount  the 
Fate  of  our  Parents,  our  Kings,  our  Generals,  &c. 


1  Cremation  was  seldom  practiced  by  the  barbarous  nations  of  the  North,  but  was 
customary  in  Central  America  and  among  certain  California  tribes.  The  scaffolds 
built  for  corpses  were  but  temporary  resting  places  ;  among  perhaps  most  of  the  wan- 
dering tribes  the  body  was  taken  down  at  the  close  of  the  hunt  or  raid,  when  the 
tribesmen  next  passed  that  way,  and  interred  at  the  village  of  the  deceased  ;  among 
the  Hurons,  at  the  end  of  a  period  of  from  eight  to  twelve  vears,  all  bones  were  col- 
lected and  interred.     Jes.  Rel.,  i,  p.  267.  —  Ed. 

2  This  singular  custom  of  avoiding  mention  of  the  name  of  the  dead  is  frequently 


474  Some  New  Voyages 

Upon  the  Death  of  a  Savage  his  Slaves  marry  the  other 
Women  Slaves,  and  live  by  themfelves  in  a  diftinct  Hut,  as 
being  then  free,  or  fuch  as  have  no  Mafter  to  ferve.  The 
Children  that  fpring  from  this  fort  of  Marriages,  are  adopted 
and  reputed  the  Children  of  the  Nation,  by  reafon  of  their 
being  born  in  the  Village  and  in  the  Country.  There's  no 
reafon,  fay  they,  that  fuch  Children  fliould  bear  the  Misfortunes 
of  their  Parents,  or  come  into  the  World  in  Slavery,  fence  they 
contributed  nothing  towards  their  Creation.  Thefe  Slaves  take 
care  to  go  every  Day  to  the  foot  of  their  Matter's  Coffin,  and 
there  offer  fome  Pipes  and  Tobaco,  as  a  grateful  acknowl- 
edgment of  their  Liberty.  But  now  that  I  am  got  upon  the 
Subject  of  Tobaco,  I  rauft  acquaint  you  that  almoft  all  the  Sav- 
ages fmoak,  but  they  never  chew  Tobaco,  nor  take  it  in  Snuff. 
They  fow  and  reap  a  great  deal  of  it,  but  then  it  differs  from 
what  we  have  in  Europe,  though  our  firft  Seed  came  from 
America;  and  in  regard  that  'tis  in  a  manner  good  for  noth- 
ing, they  are  forc'd  to  buy  up  Brafil  Tobaco,  which  they  mix 
with  a  certain  Leaf  of  an  agreeable   Smell,  call'd  Sagakomi.1 


mentioned  by  the  Jesuits.  For  great  men,  the  custom  of  resuscitation  was  practiced, 
whereby  one  was  appointed  to  take  upon  himself  the  name  and  responsibilities  of  the 
deceased.     Jes.  Rel.,  i,  p.  267;  xvii,  p.  242.  —  Ed. 

1  Sagakomi  (sacacommis)  is  the  bear  berry  {Arctostaphylos  wva-ursi) ,  one  of  the 
ingredients  of  Indian  tobacco  or  kinnikinnik.  The  Spanish  called  it  manzanita. 
Lewis  and  Clark  say  that  this  word  is  derived  from  the  habit  of  the  clerks  (commis) 
of  the  North  West  Company  who  carried  this  berry  in  a  bag  (sac)  for  smoking ;  — 
see  Thwaites,  Original  Journals  of  the  Lewis  and  Clark  Expedition,  iv,  pp.  13,  21, 
22 ;  but  Coues,  New  Light  on  the  Early  History  of  the  Greater  Northwest  (New  York, 
1897),  p.  581,  shrewdly  conjectures  that  the  form  sacacommis  was  a  pun  upon  a  native 
word  —  as  is  here  proven.  Brazil  tobacco  (Nicotiana  tabacum)  is  stronger  than  the 
northern  species  (N.  rustica) ,  hence  more  desired  by  the  Indians. — Ed. 


to  North- America.  475 

I  have  nothing  more  to  fay  upon  this  Head  ;  for  I  think  I 
have  given  you  a  fufficient  account  [54]  of  their  Difeafes  and 
of  their  Remedies,  which  in  my  Opinion  are  as  Savage  as 
themfelves.  But  let  that  be  as  it  will,  'tis  certain  they  feldom 
die  of  any  other  Diftemper  than  of  a  Pleurify.  As  for  the 
other  Difeafes  they  get  over  them  with  the  greateft  danger 
in  the  World,  for  fetting  afide  their  Courage  and  Patience 
which  goes  beyond  any  thing  that  we  can  imagine,  they  take 
all  the  ways  of  the  World  to  burft  themfelves  by  Eating  and 
Drinking  when  they  have  grofs  Feavours  upon  them,  and 
when  the  fit  is  over  fmoaking  that  Brafil  Tobaco,  which  with- 
out difpute  is  the  ftrongeft  fort  that  we  know  of. 

The  Women  of  this  Country  are  fubjecl:  to  the  Natural 
Diforders  as  well  as  elfewhere,  and  fometimes  die  of  them. 
'Tis  true  they  have  an  admirable  Remedy  for  redreffing  the 
Diforders  that  flow  from  that  Source;  I  mean,  a  certain 
Potion;  but  it  hath  no  Operation  unlefs  they  abftain  from 
all  manner  of  Excefs,  which  they  are  very  unwilling  to  do. 
Some  French  Surgeons  affur'd  me,  that  the  European  Women 
void  a  much  greater  quantity  and  hold  the  Flux  longer  upon 
them  than  thefe  Americans,  who  feldom  have  thofe  upon  them 
above  two  Days  at  a  time.  Another  Inconvenience  that  fre- 
quently annoys  them,  is  an  over-bearing  quantity  of  Milk; 
for  which  they  ufe  to  put  little  Puppies  to  fuck  their  Breafts. 


476  Some  New  Voyages 


[55]     ^e  Diverjions  of  Hunting  and  Shooting  ufual  among 

the  Savages. 

I  HAVE  already  defcrib'd  the  Hunting  of  the  Elks  and 
fome  other  Animals  of  Canada  in  my  10th  and  nth  Letter, 
fo  that  now  it  remains  only  to  give  you  an  exact  account  of 
the  Beavers,  which  are  faid  to  be  Amphibious  Animals,  as  I 
obferv'd  in  my  16th  Letter,  with  which  I  fent  you  the  Figure 
of  thefe  Animals.  And  becaufe  thefe  Beafts  do  fome  things 
very  furprifing  by  a  wonderful  Inftin6t,  to  give  you  a  right 
Notion  wherein  their  Cunning  confifts,  I  fend  you  a  Draught 
of  thofe  Ponds  which  they  know  how  to  make  more  Artifi- 
cially than  any  Man  can  do. 

The  Savages  of  Canada  reflecting  on  the  excellent  Qualities 
of  the  Beavers,  are  wont  to  fay,  That  they  have  fo  much  Wit, 
Capacity  and  Judgment,  that  they  cannot  believe  their  Souls  die 
with  their  Bodies.  They  add,  That  if  they  were  permitted  to 
reafon  about  things  invifible,  and  which  fall  not  under  their  Senfes, 
they  durft  maintain,  that  they  are  Immortal  like  ours.  But  not  to 
infift  on  this  Chimerical  Fancy,  it  muft  be  allow'd,  that  there 
are  an  infinite  number  of  Men  upon  the  Earth  (without  men- 
tioning the  Tartars,  the  Peafants  of  Mufcovy,  of  Norwayi  and  a 
Hundred  other  forts  of  People)  who  have  not  the  Hundredth 
part  of  the  Underftanding  which  thefe  Animals  have. 


to  iVor^-America.  477 

The  Beavers  difcover  fo  much  Art  in  their  Works,  that  we 
cannot  without  offering  violence  to  our  Reafon  attribute  their 
Skill  to  mere  [56]  Inftincl,  for  it  is  lawful  to  doubt  of  fome 
things  whereof  we  cannot  difcover  the  Caufe,  provided  they 
have  not  any  Connexion  with  Religion ;  I  mean  fuch  things 
as  appear  fo  ftrange  to  Sence  and  Reafon,  that  we  cannot  give 
credit  to  them,  unlefs  we  have  feen  them  our  felves.  How- 
ever, I  will  venture  to  write  to  you  many  Particulars  upon  this 
Subject,  which  perhaps  may  make  you  doubt  of  the  truth  of 
my  Narrative.  I  will  begin  with  affuring  you,  that  thefe  Ani- 
mals join  together  in  a  Society  confifting  of  an  Hundred,  and 
that  they  feem  to  talk  and  reafon  with  one  another  by  certain 
bemoaning  inarticulate  Sounds.1  The  Savages  fay  they  have 
an  intelligible  Jargon,  by  means  whereof  they  communicate 
their  Sentiments  and  Thoughts  to  one  another.  I  never  was 
an  Eye  Witnefs  of  this  kind  of  Affemblies,  but  many  Savages 
and  Coureurs  de  Bois,  who  are  People  worthy  of  Credit,  have 
affur'd  me,  that  there  is  nothing  more  true.  They  add,  that 
they  confult  among  themfelves  about  what  things  they  muft 
do  to  maintain  their  Cottages,  their  Banks  and  their  Lakes, 
and  about  every  thing  that  concerns  the  Prefervation  of  their 
Commonwealth.  Thefe  good  People  would  perfwade  me, 
that  the  Beavers  fet  Centries  while  they  are  cutting  through 
great  Trees,  as  big  as  Tuns,  with  their  Teeth,  in  the  Neigh- 
bourhood of  their  little  Lakes,  and  that  when  thefe  Centinels 


1On  the  methods  of  communication  between  beavers,  consult  a  recent  monograph 
by  Dugmore,  "  The  Outlaw  ;  a  character  study  of  a  Beaver,"  in  Smithsonian  Insti- 
tution Report,  1900,  pp.  517-522.  —  Ed. 


478  Some  New  Voyages 

cry  out,  upon  the  approach  of  Men  or  Beafts,  all  the  Beavers 
that  are  at  Work  throw  themfelves  into  the  Water  and  fave 
themfelves  by  diving,  till  they  come  at  their  Cottages.1  I 
mention  this  matter  of  Fadl  upon  the  Report  of  a  Thoufand 
Perfons,  who  could  have  no  Intereft  to  impofe  upon  me 
with  Fables ;  but  what  follows  I  have  obferv'd  my  felf,  in  the 
Country  where  the  Outagamis  Hunt,  [57]  which  I  mention'd 
in  the  beginning  of  my  16th  Letter. 

The  Beavers  finding  a  Rivulet  that  runs  crofs  a  Meadow, 
fet  themfelves  to  make  Banks  and  Ramparts,  which  flopping 
the  courfe  of  the  Water  caufe  an  Inundation  over  the  whole 
Meadow;  that  fometimes  is  no  lefs  than  two  Leagues  in 
Circumference.  This  Bank  is  made  with  Trees  which  they 
cut  down  with  their  four  great  fharp  Teeth,  and  then  drag 
them  along  as  they  fwim  in  the  Water.  Thefe  Trees  being 
rang'd  a  crofs  at  the  bottom  of  this  Meadow,  the  Animals 
load  themfelves  with  Grafs  and  fat  Earth,  which  they  tranf- 
port  upon  their  great  Tails,  and  throw  in  between  the  Wood 
with  fo  much  Art  and  Induftry,  that  the  mod  skilful  Brick- 
layer can  hardly  make  a  ftronger  Wall  with  Lime  and  Morter. 
In  the  Night  time  they  are  heard  to  Work  with  fo  much 
Vigour  and  Diligence,  that  one  would  think  them  to  be  Men 
at  Work,  if  he  were  not  affur'd  before  hand  that  they  are 

1  Apropos  of  Lahontan's  hearsay  reports  of  the  sagacity  of  the  beaver,  the  fol- 
lowing should  be  noted  :  "  Numberless  writers  upon  this  fertile  and  suggestive  theme 
have  been  too  easily  betrayed  into  a  fanciful  exaggeration  of  facts,  making  the  beaver 
a  marvel  of  reflective,  purposive,  and  cooperative  intelligence  — an  imaginary  picture, 
which  an  appeal  to  nature  does  not  justify."  —  Riverside  Natural  History,  v., 
p.  120.  —  Ed. 


to  North- America..  479 

Beavers.  Their  Tails  ferve  them  for  Trouels,  and  their  Teeth 
for  Axes,  their  Paws  fupply  the  place  of  Hands,  and  their 
Feet  ferve  inftead  of  Oars:  In  fine,  they  make  Banks  of  4  or 
500  Paces  in  length,  of  20  Feet  in  heighth,  and  7  or  8  in  thick- 
nefs,  in  the  fpace  of  5  or  6  Months,  though  there  are  not 
above  a  Hundred  at  moft  that  Work  upon  them.1  I  muft 
obferve  here  by  the  by,  that  the  Savages,  out  of  a  fcruple  of 
Confcience,  never  break  thefe  Banks,  but  only  bore  a  hole 
through  them,  as  I  mail  mow  you  hereafter.  Befides  their 
Talent  of  cutting  down  the  Trees,  their  Art  of  making  them 
fall  upon  the  Water  appears  to  me  altogether  furprizing ; 
for  it  requires  Judgment  and  clofe  Attention  to  fucceed  in  it, 
and  chiefly  to  nick  the  time  when  the  Wind  can  aflift  them  to 
make  the  fall  of  the  [58]  Tree  more  eafie,  and  to  make  them 
fall  upon  their  little  Lakes.  But  this  is  not  the  fineft  Work 
of  thefe  Animals,  that  of  their  Cottages  furpaffes  all  Imagina- 
tion ;  for  it  requires  both  Skill  and  Strength  to  make  holes  at 
the  bottom  of  the  Water,  for  planting  their  fix  Polls  which 
they  take  care  to  place  exactly  in  the  middle  of  the  Lake  : 
Upon  thefe  fix  Pofts  they  fix  their  little  Houfe,  which  is  built 
in  the  form  of  an  Oven,  and  is  made  up  of  fat  Earth,  Herbs 
and  Branches  of  Trees,  having  three  Stories  that  they  may 
mount  up  from  one  to  the  other  when  the  Waters  rife  by 
Rains  or  Thaw.  The  Rafters  are  of  Rufhes,  and  each  Beaver 
hath  an  Apartment  to  himfelf.     They  enter  into  their  Cabin 


1  Upon  the  subject  of  beaver  dams,  consult  Jes.  Rel.,  i,  p.  251  ;  ix,  pp.  129,  131  ; 
Martin,  Castorolqgia,  pp.  75,  76;  Wells,  "The  Beaver,"  in  Harper's  Magazine, 
January,  1889.  —  Ed. 


480  Some  New  Voyages 

under  Water,  thro'  a  great  hole  in  the  firft  Floor,  which  is 
encompafs'd  with  Afp  Wood  cut  in  pieces  on  purpofe,  that 
they  may  the  more  eafily  drag  it  into  their  Cells  when  they 
have  a  mind  to  eat ;  for  fince  it  is  their  common  Food,  they 
are  always  fo  Provident  as  to  lay  up  great  heaps  of  it,  and 
chiefly  during  the  Autumn,  forefeeing  that  the  cold  Weather 
will  freeze  up  their  Lakes,  and  keep  them  {hut  up  two  or 
three  Months  in  their  Cabins.1 

I  mould  never  make  an  end  if  I  attempted  to  give  an 
account  of  all  the  feveral  Artifices  of  thefe  Ingenious  Animals, 
the  Order  fettled  in  their  little  Commonwealth,  and  the  Pre- 
cautions they  ufe  to  fecure  themfelves  from  the  purfuit  of 
other  Animals :  I  mail  only  obferve,  that  all  other  Animals 
upon  Earth,  however  Strong,  Active  and  Vigorous  they  may 
be,  have  other  Animals  which  they  are  affraid  of ;  but  thefe  I 
now  fpeak  of  are  not  apprehenfive  of  any  danger  but  only 
from  Men,  for  the  Wolves,  the  Foxes,  the  Bears,  &c.  care  not 
for  offering  to  attack  them  in  their  Cabines,  although  they 
have  the  faculty  of  Diving;  and  it  is  certain  it  [59]  is  not 
their  Intereft  to  do  it,  for  the  Beavers  would  defend  them- 
felves very  eafily  with  their  fharp  cutting  Teeth ;  fo  that  they 
cannot  be  infulted  but  by  Land,  and  'tis  for  that  reafon  they 
never  go  farther  than  twenty  Paces  from  the  edge  of  their 
Lake,  and  always  fet  Centinels  to  watch,  who  cry  out  to  give 
them  notice  when  they  hear  the  leaft  noife. 


1  It  does  not  appear  to  be  true  that  beavers  can  determine  the  direction  a  tree  will 
fall ;  see  Martin,  op.  cit.,  pp.  68-72.  Nor  do  they  plant  posts  to  build  their  lodges  ; 
see  Hearn's  account  in  Martin,  p.  226;  also  Jes.  Rel.,  ix,  pp.  127,  129.  —  Ed. 


to  North- America.  481 

It  remains  now  only  that  I  mould  give  an  Account  of  the 
Nature  of  the  Countries  where  the  Beavers  are  hunted,  fome 
of  which  are  defcrib'd  in  my  Map.1  And  firft  you  muft  know, 
that  you  cannot  go  four  or  five  Leagues  in  the  Woods  of 
Canada,  but  you  meet  with  a  little  Beaver-Lake  :  So  that  one 
may  fay,  that  all  this  vaft  Continent  is  a  Country  for  Beaver 
hunting;  but  this  is  not  what  I  mean.  The  Places  for  Hunting 
that  I  now  fpeak  of  are  a  multitude  of  little  Lakes  replenfh'd 
with  thefe  Animals,  the  diftance  of  which  from  one  to  another 
is  inconflderable.  For  Inftance,  thofe  of  Saguinan,  of  L'  ours 
qui  dort,  of  the  River  of  Puants,  are  about  twenty  Leagues  in 
length,  and  in  that  whole  compafs  of  Ground  their  are  found 
Sixty  little  Beaver  Lakes  more  or  lefs,  where  a  certain  number 
of  Savages  may  Hunt  in  the  Winter  time.2  'Tis  commonly 
about  the  end  oi  Autumn  that  the  Savages  fet  out  from  their 
Villages  in  a  Canow  to  go  and  poft  themfelves  in  the  places 
for  Hunting,  and  as  they  know  all  the  places  much  better 
than  I  do  the  Streets  of  Quebec,  they  agree  among  themfelves, 
as  they  are  Travelling,  to  allot  each  Family  a  certain  compafs 
of  Ground,  fo  that  when  they  arrive  at  the  place  they  divide 
themfelves  into  Tribes?  Each  Hunter  fixes  his  Houfe  in  the 
Center  of  that  Ground  which  is  his  Diftric~t,  as  you  may  fee 


1  For  a  map  of  beaver  habitat  and  distribution,  see  Martin,  p.  58.  The  beaver 
will  probably  soon  become  extinct  in  North  America  ;  even  the  interesting  preserved 
colonies  in  the  Yellowstone  National  Park,  where  they  can  still  be  studied  with  com- 
parative ease,  suffer  a  steady  depiction  at  the  hands  of  poachers.  —  Ed. 

2  See  pp.  143,  168,  208,  ante.  —  Ed. 

3  Martin  (Castorologia,  p.  140)  cites  instances  where  the  Indians  kept  with  fidelity 
to  the  bounds  of  their  beaver  reserves.  —  Ed. 

31 


482  Some  New  Voyages 

defcrib'd  in  this  Cut.  There  are  eight  or  ten  Hunters  in  each 
Cottage,  [60]  who  have  four  or  five  Lakes  for  their  fhare.  In 
each  Lake  there  is  at  leaft  one  Houfe  or  Kennel  of  Beavers, 
and  fometimes  two  or  three.  After  the  Huntsmen  have  built 
their  Huts  they  employ  themfelves  in  laying  Traps  for  Otters, 
Foxes,  Bears,  Land  Beavers  and  Martens,  upon  the  fides  of  their 
Lakes ;  and  when  they  are  fet  go  very  orderly  to  look  after 
them  every  Day :  But  above  all  they  are  fo  Juft,  that  they  would 
choofe  rather  to  die  for  Hunger  than  to  ftraggle  out  of  the 
Bounds  allotted  them,  or  to  fteal  the  Beafts  that  are  taken  in 
their  Neighbours  Traps.  They  feed  well  and  make  merry 
during  this  Hunting  Seafon,  which  lafts  for  four  Months ;  for 
they  find  more  than  they  have  occafion  for,  of  Trouts,  Hares, 
Wood-Foul,  Bears,  and  fometimes  they  meet  with  Deer  and 
Roebucks. 

The  Beavers  are  feldom  catch'd  by  Traps  unlefs  they  put 

in  them  fome  pieces  of  red  Afp*  which  they  love 
{ort  °*      extreamly,  and  is  not  eafie  to  be  found.     They 

are  taken  in  the  Autumn  by  making  a  great  hole 
under  their  Banks,  by  which  they  drain  all  the  Water  out  of 
their  Lakes,  and  then  the  Beavers  being  left  on  dry  Ground 
the  Savages  kill  them  all,  except  a  dozen  of  Females,  and  half 
a  dozen  of  Males  ;  after  which  they  are  very  exact  in  flopping 
up  the  hole  they  had  made,  which  they  do  in  fuch  a  manner 
that  the  Lake  is  fill'd  with  Water  as  before. 

Their  way  of  Hunting  in  the  Winter  time  when  the  Lake 
is   frozen,  is   by  making   holes   round   the   Kennels  of  the 


to  North '-America.  483 

Beavers,  upon  which  they  place  Nets  that  reach  from  one  to 
the  other,  and  when  they  are  extended  as  they  mould  be, 
they  lay  open  the  Kennels  of  thefe  poor  Animals  with  an  Ax ; 
upon  which  they  throw  themfelves  into  the  Water,  and  coming 
to  take  [61]  Breath  at  thefe  Holes,  are  catch'd  in  the  Nets; 
at  this  rate  not  one  of  them  efcapes,  but  the  Savages  having 
no  mind  to  extirpate  'em  throw  back  into  the  Holes,  the  fame 
number  of  Beavers,  Male  and  Female,  as  they  ufually  do  at 
their  Hunting  in  Autumn,  as  I  have  already  told  you. 

They  may  likewife  be  kill'd  when  they  Swim  upon  the 
Water,  or  when  they  come  Afhore  to  cut  down  Trees  ;  but 
then  you  muft  be  very  well  hid  and  not  ftir,  for  upon  the  leaft 
noife  that  they  hear,  they  throw  themfelves  into  the  Water, 
and  Dive  till  they  come  to  their  Kennels.  This  way  of  Hunt- 
ing is  peculiar  to  Travellers,  who  finding  themfelves  lodg'd 
near  fome  Beaver  Lake,  endeavour  to  furprize  them,  by 
Sculking  behind  fome  Log  or  fome  great  Tree  till  Night 
comes  on.1 

The  Savages  take  alfo  other  Animals  in  thefe  Beaver- 
Hunting-Countries,  by  running  up  and  down.  I  have  already 
told  you,  that  they  fet  Traps,  in  which  Foxes,  Wolves,  Martens 
and  others  are  catch'd  when  they  bite  at  the  Bait.  I  have  alfo 
explain'd  to  you  the  way  of  making  this  fort  of  Traps,  in  my 

1  On  methods  of  beaver  hunting,  see  Jes.  Rel.,  vi,  pp.  299-303  ;  Masson,  Bour- 
geois, ii,  pp.  342-344.  On  modern  methods,  consult  Wells,  "  Beaver."  The  use  of 
castoreum  as  a  bait  was  not  adopted  until  near  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century, 
and  led  to  new  methods  of  hunting  which  rapidly  reduced  the  numbers  of  this  animal. 
For  the  method  of  preparation  of  this  bait,  see  frequent  references  in  Original  Journals 
of  Lewis  and  Clark  Expedition.  —  Ed. 


484  Some  New  Voyages 

nth  Letter.  Thefe  Engines  do  not  differ  from  one  another, 
but  only  in  bulk :  Thofe  for  the  Bears  are  the  ftrongeft,  but 
they  are  of  no  ufe  till  the  beginning  of  Winter ;  for  then  the 
Bears  feek  out  great  Trees  which  are  Hollow,  where  the 
Branches  begin  to  fpread,  that  they  may  Neftle  in  them. 
Many  People  will  hardly  believe  that  thefe  Animals  can  live  3 
Months  in  fuch  Prifons,  without  any  other  Food  but  the  Juice 
of  their  Paws  which  they  fuck  continually  :  And  yet  the  matter 
of  Fact  is  undeniably  true.  But  I  reckon  it  yet  more  ftrange, 
that  they  are  able  to  climb  up  to  thofe  Lurking-Holes,  efpe- 
cially  at  a  time  when  they  are  fo  Fat,  [62]  that  2  Savages 
conduct  them  whither  they  pleafe  with  Poles,  they  being 
fcarce  able  to  walk.  This  I  faw  3  or  4  times  during  the  Win- 
ter in  1687,  when  I  Winter'd  at  Fort  St.  Jojeph  ;  for  the  Hurons 
of  Gaintfouan  brought  fome  of  them  off,  which  enter'd  the 
Fort  without  any  reluctancy.1 

The  Savages  make  likewife  Traps  for  the  Land-Beavers, 
which  for  the  reafon  given  in  my  16th  Letter,  neftle  on  the 
Land,  like  Foxes,  Conies  and  Badgers :  And  notwithftanding 
that  they  are  purfu'd  by  the  other  Beavers,  yet  they  make 
their  Dens  about  the  Lakes,  Brooks  and  Rivers.  They  are 
eafily  taken  in  thefe  Traps,  efpecially  when  they  are  Baited 
with  the  Head  of  an  Otter :  For  there  is  fo  great  an  Antipathy 


1  This  Huron  appellation  has  not  been  certainly  Identified  ;  but  consult  Coyne 
(ed.),  "Exploration  of  the  Great  Lakes,  1669-70,"  in  Ontario  Historical  Society 
Records  and  Papers,  iv  (Toronto,  1903),  especially  the  map  ;  also  Jones,  "  Identifi- 
cation of  St.  Ignace  II  and  of  Ekarenniondi,"  in  Ontario  Archaeological  Report,  1902, 
pp.  92-136,  particularly  the  map  of  Petun  Country,  p.  113.  —  Ed. 


to  North- America.  485 

between  thefe  2  forts  of  Animals,  that  they  are  continually  at 
War  with  one  another.1 

The  Savages  inform'd  me,  that  they  faw  a  great  Company 
of  Otters  Affembled  together  about  the  Month  of  May,  who 
had  the  boldnefs  to  attack  the  Beavers  in  their  Huts,  but 
were  beaten  back  and  driven  from  the  Lake  with  lofs.  They 
added,  that  a  Beaver  can  defend  himfelf  againft  3  Otters,  by 
the  help  of  his  Teeth  and  Tail.  In  fine,  'tis  certain  that  the 
Lake  Beavers  are  feldom  taken  in  Traps,  unlefs  they  be  Baited 
with  fome  Afpwood,  as  I  have  already  obferv'd.  I  acquainted 
you  above  that  the  Savages  vifit  their  Traps  every  day,  and 
carry  into  their  Cottages  the  Prey  that  they  find  catch'd. 
Immediately  after  that,  the  Slaves  Flea  the  Beafts  that  are 
taken,  and  ftretch  out  their  Skins  in  the  Air,  or  on  the  Ice  to 
dry  them.  This  Imployment  lafts  as  long  as  the  time  of 
Hunting,  which  ends  with  the  great  Thaw  ;  and  then  they  put 
up  their  Skins  in  Bundles,  and  carry  them  to  the  place  where 
they  left  the  Canows  when  they  firft  came  into  this  Hunting- 
Country. 

[63]  Altho  the  Savages  have  great  reafon  to  be  afraid 
of  their  Enemies,  while  they  lye  difperfed  up  and  down  in 
a  Country,  which  is  no  lefs  than  20  Leagues  in  Compafs, 
as  I  intimated  above ;  yet  they  fcarce  ever  ufe  the  Precaution 
of  fending  out  Scouts  upon  all  hands,  and  for  want  of  it  are 
often  Surpriz'd,  when  they  leaft  think  of  it.  I  could  relate 
20  fatal  Excurfions  of  the  Iroquefe  into  the  Hunting-Countries 

1  On  land  beavers,  see  pp.  170-172,  ante.  —  Ed. 


486  Some  New  Voyages 

I  have  been  fpeaking  of,  in  which  they  cut  the  Throats  of  many 
of  our  Friends  and  Allies.  I  did  all  that  I  could  to  per- 
fuade  our  Allies  that  their  Conduct  was  faulty  upon  this 
occafion,  fince  they  could  eafily  fecure  themfelves  from  fuch 
Infults,  by  Building  their  Cottages  at  a  place  where  they 
might  poft  a  Guard  of  Centinels,  to  watch  and  difcover  any 
Enemies,  that  might  advance  to  the  Frontiers  of  thefe  Hunt- 
ing-Countries. They  only  made  anfwer;  that  this  indeed  was 
reafonable,  and  that  it  was  true,  they  did  not  Jleep  in  fafety  for 
want  of  that  Precaution.  In  fine,  they  imagine  that  their  Ene- 
mies are  bufied  in  Hunting  on  their  own  Coafts;  and  upon 
that  Apprehenfion,  are  fuch  Fools  as  not  to  ufe  any  Precau- 
tion. But  this  I  know,  that  the  Iroquefe  take  quite  another 
Method,  having  their  Scouts  and  advanc'd  Guards,  which 
are  always  in  Motion;  by  which  means  they  are  fcarce  ever 
difturb'd  in  their  Hunting.  Neverthelefs,  I  think  I  ought 
not  to  conclude  this  Chapter,  without  giving  you  an  account 
of  2  Attempts  wherein  the  Iroquefe  mifs'd  of  their  defign 
to  furprize  their  Enemies,  tho  they  had  very  good  Succefs 
upon  many  other  occafions. 

In  the  year  1680.  The  Oumamis  and  Ilinefe  being  at  Hunt- 
ing near  the  River  Oumamis;  a  Party  of  400  Iroquefe  furpriz'd 
them,  kill'd  30  or  40  Hunters,  and  took  300  Prisoners, 
including  [64]  Women  and  Children.1  After  they  had  refted 
a  little  while,  they  prepar'd  to  return  Home  by  fhort  Jour- 


1  Evidently  this  was  an  episode  (although  probably  with  exaggerated  numbers) 
occurring  in  the  Illinois-Iroquois  war  (1680-82).  The  Miami  were  at  first  reluctant 
allies  of  the  latter,  but  later  complained  that  they  "were  daily  slaughtered  by  the 
Iroquois."     See  N.  Y.  Colon.  Docs.,  ix,  pp.  162,  177,  192.  —  Ed. 


to  North- America.  487 

neys,  becaufe  they  had  reafon  to  believe  that  they  mould 
reach  their  own  Villages  before  the  Ilinefe  and  Oumamis 
could  have  time  to  Rally,  and  give  notice  of  their  Difafter 
to  fuch  of  the  Nations  as  were  Hunting  in  remoter  Places. 
But  they  were  fo  much  deceiv'd,  that  the  Ilinefe  and  Oumamis 
Rallied  to  the  number  of  200,  and  refolv'd  to  die  Fighting 
rather  than  fuffer  their  Countrymen  to  be  carried  away  by 
the  Iroquefe.  In  the  mean  time,  becaufe  their  Party  was  not 
an  equal  Match  for  the  Enemies,  they  contriv'd  a  notable 
Stratagem :  For  after  they  had  well  confider'd  in  what  man- 
ner they  mould  Attack  them,  they  concluded  that  they  ought 
to  follow  them  at  a  fmall  diftance  till  it  began  to  Rain.  Their 
Project  fucceeded,  and  the  Heavens  feem'd  to  favour  it :  For 
while  it  Rain'd  continually  one  whole  day  from  Morning  to 
Night,  they  fo  quicken'd  their  pace,  from  the  time  that  the 
Rain  begun  to  fall,  that  they  pafs'd  by  on  one  fide  at  2 
Leagues  diftance  from  the  Iroquefe,  and  fo  got  before  them 
to  lay  an  Ambufcade  in  the  middle  of  a  Meadow,  which  the 
Enemy  was  to  crofs  in  order  to  reach  a  Wood,  where  they 
had  a  mind  to  make  a  halt  and  kindle  great  Fires.  The 
Ilinefe  and  Oumamis  lying  upon  their  Belly  among  the  Fern, 
waited  till  the  Iroquefe  were  got  into  the  middle  of  them 
before  they  Shot  off  their  Arrows ;  and  then  they  Attack'd 
them  fo  vigorouily  with  their  Clubs,  that  the  Enemy  finding 
their  Fire-Arms  unferviceable,  by  reafon  that  their  Prime  was 
wet,  were  fore'd  to  throw  them  down  on  the  Ground,  and 
defend  themfelves  with  the  fame  Arms  wherewith  they  were 
Attack'd,  (I  mean  with  Clubs.)      But  as  I  obferv'd  before, 


488  Some  New  Voyages 

that  the  [65]  Ilinefe  are  fomething  more  dextrous  and  nimble 
than  the  Iroquefe,  fo  the  latter  were  forc'd  to  yield  to  the  for- 
mer, and  retreated  Fighting  till  Night  came  on,  after  they  had 
loft  180  Soldiers.  The  Fight  which  lafted  but  one  hour,  had 
continued  all  Night,  if  the  Conquerors  had  not  been  afraid, 
left  their  Countrymen  being  ftill  Bound  and  left  behind 
'em,  mould  be  expos'd  to  fome  Surprize  in  the  dark:  And 
therefore  after  they  had  rejoyn'd  them,  and  feiz'd  all  the 
Fire-Arms  of  their  Enemies  who  were  fled  and  difpers'd  up 
and  down,  they  return'd  into  their  own  Country,  without 
taking  one  Iroquefe,  for  fear  of  weakning  themfelves. 

The  2d  Attempt  hapned  3  years  after  this,  in  the  Hunting- 
Country  of  the  Outagamis ;  where  the  Governor  of  that  Na- 
tion, as  I  inform'd  you  in  my  16th  Letter,  gave  me  10  Soldiers 
to  accompany  me  to  the  Long  River.  The  Blow  then  given 
was  after  this  manner.  A  Body  of  1000  Iroquefe  being  come 
in  their  Canows  about  the  end  of  Autumn,  as  far  as  the  Bay 
of  Miffifagues,  in  the  Lake  of  the  Hurons,1  without  being  dif- 
cover'd,  Landed  at  this  place;  and  being  very  numerous, 
march'd  up  the  Country  with  their  Nets,  in  order  to  Fifh  in 
the  little  Lakes  and  Rivers,  till  the  Frofty  Seafon  fhould  come 
on,  which  hapned  a  few  days  after.  After  the  Ice  was  ftrong 
enough  to  bear  them,  they  continued  their  Courfe,  coafting 
along  the  great  Lake  of  the  Hurons,  till  they  were  5  or  6 
Leagues  below  the  Fall  call'd  Saut  Sainte  Marie,  which  they 
would  not  approach  to  for  fear  of  meeting  with  fome  Coureurs 


1  "  Bay  of  Missisagues  "  is  the  present  Georgian  Bay,  off  Lake  Huron.     The 
Huronia  of  the  Jesuit  Relations  was  bounded  on  the  west  by  this  bay.  —  Ed. 


to  iVor^-America.  489 

de  bois  in  the  Fort  of  the  Jefuits.  Having  crofs'd  the  Bay, 
they  judg'd  it  convenient  to  make  very  fhort  Journies,  for 
fear  of  being  difcover'd.  And  they  were  fo  cautious  as  to 
march  all  in  a  Row  upon  the  Snow ;  that  if  [66]  by  chance 
any  one  mould  difcover  their  Footfteps,  it  might  be  thought 
that  they  were  not  above  Thirty  or  Forty  at  the  moft.  After 
this  manner  they  TravelPd  till  the  15th  or  20th  of  February, 
without  being  perceiv'd,  but  at  laft  they  had  the  misfortune  to 
be  difcover'd  by  four  Sauteurs,  who  feeing  fo  great  a  number 
pafs  over  a  little  Lake,  run  with  all  fpeed  to  the  Hunting 
Country  of  the  Outagamis  to  give  them  notice,  notwithftanding 
that  the  Sauteurs  were  then  at  War  with  the  Outagamis.  In  the 
mean  time  the  Thaw  coming  on  fuddenly  contrary  to  the  Ex- 
pectation of  the  Iroquefe,  who  reckon'd  upon  Twenty  Days  of 
Froft  to  come,  according  to  the  common  courfe  of  the  Seafon ; 
this  made  them  mend  their  pace,  and  look  out  for  the  nar- 
roweft  and  leaft  frequented  Paffes,  The  Outagamis  were 
mightily  perplex'd  what  courfe  to  take  in  this  cafe.  It  was 
certain  that  they  might  get  back  again  to  their  Villages  in 
fafety,  but  then  they  would  be  forc'd  to  abandon  their  Wives 
and  Children,  who  had  not  ftrength  to  run  as  the  Men.  In 
fine,  after  they  had  held  a  Council  among  themfelves,  they 
refolv'd  to  advance  as  far  as  a  certain  Pafs  about  half  a  League 
in  length  and  Thirty  Paces  in  breadth,  between  two  little 
Lakes,  which  way  they  faw  plainly  that  the  Iroquefe  were 
oblig'd  to  pafs. 

The  Outagamis  being  no  more  than  four  Hundred  thought 
fit  to  divide  themfelves  into  two  Bodies,  and  it  was  agreed, 


490  Some  New  Voyages 

that  two  Hundred  fhould  be  pofted  at  the  end  of  a  Pafs  which 
they  fhould  Fortifie  immediately  with  a  Range  of  Stakes  from 
one  Lake  to  another ;  and  that  the  other  two  Hundred  mould 
go  about  a  quarter  of  a  League  off  of  the  other  end  of  the 
Pafs,  thro'  which  the  Iroquefe  were  to  march,  to  the  end  that 
every  one  having  cut  down  a  Stake  they  [67]  might  all  run 
quickly  in  to  flop  up  that  end  of  the  Paffage,  and  that  imme- 
diately after  the  Iroquefe  had  entred  the  Defile,  the  Scouts  ap- 
pointed to  obferve  their  March  fhould  come  and  give  them 
notice ;  all  which  was  punctually  put  in  Execution :  For  as 
foon  as  that  great  Multitude,  who  induftrioufly  pitch'd  upon 
the  narrow  Roads,  was  entred  into  this  Pafs,  the  two  Hundred 
Outagamis,  who  were  about  a  quarter  of  a  League  to  one  fide 
of  it,  run  in  with  all  their  Might  and  carried  with  them  a 
fufficient  number  of  Pales  to  enclofe  that  little  piece  of  Land 
which  was  bounded  by  the  two  little  Lakes,  fo  that  they  had 
time  enough  to  fet  them  up  and  faften  them  with  Earth, 
before  the  Iroquefe,  being  aftonifh'd  to  find  their  way  block'd 
up  at  the  other  end,  could  return  back  the  fame  way,  to  fee 
themfelves  fhut  up  between  two  Barricadoes.  Now  the  Sav- 
ages, as  I  have  often  told  you,  are  never  fo  rafh  as  to  attack  a 
Redoubt  of  Fifty  Palifadoes,  yet  thefe  Iroquefe  were  refolv'd 
to  venture  upon  an  Attack,  and  with  that  view  run  up  with  all 
expedition  to  force  the  new  Barricado ;  but  they  flacken'd 
their  pace  after  the  firft  difcharge  which  the  Outagamis  made 
through  the  intervalls  of  the  Pales,  for  they  had  not  time  to 
joyn  them  as  they  fhould  be.  The  Iroquefe  feeing  themfelves 
thus  fhut  up,  took  the  number  of  the  Outagamis  to  be  much 


to  North- America.  491 

greater  than  realy  it  was.  In  the  mean  time  the  great  Queftion 
was,  how  to  get  out  of  this  Prifon  ?  For  to  throw  themfelves 
into  the  Water  and  fwim  over  one  of  thefe  Lakes,  was  to  run 
the  hazard  of  ones  Life,  Derides  that  one  muft  be  long-winded 
and  have  a  good  Heart  to  fwim  over  a  broad  Lake,  at  a  time 
when  the  Water  was  cold,  the  Ice  being  not  quite  melted. 
This  Confultation  gave  the  Outagamis  time  to  fortifie  their 
Barricadoes,  and  to  [68]  fend  out  Scouts  who  were  plac'd  at 
a  diftance  from  one  another,  upon  the  Banks  of  thefe  two 
Lakes,  to  knock  all  on  the  Head  that  offer'd  to  fwim  to  the 
fhore. 

Notwithftanding  all  thefe  Precautions  the  Iroquefe  found 
out  a  wonderful  Expedient,  which  was  to  make  Floats  of  the 
Trees  wherewith  they  were  encompafs'd  ;  but  the  blows  of  the 
Ax  made  too  great  a  noife,  which  difcover'd  their  Defign  to 
the  Outagamis,  and  therefore  they  made  Canows  of  Hart-skins 
to  run  backward  and  forward  upon  the  two  Lakes  in  the 
Night  time.  Thefe  Boats  were  made  in  five  or  fix  Days, 
during  which  time  the  Iroquefe  fifh'd  and  catch'd  abundance  of 
Trouts  in  the  fight  of  the  Outagamis,  who  could  not  hinder 
them.  After  this  no  body  doubted,  but  they  muft  crofs  one 
of  the  Lakes,  and  fight  ftoutly  when  they  came  to  the  Landing 
place,  in  cafe  their  fecret  Navigation  was  difcover'd.  That 
they  might  the  better  fucceed  in  their  Defign  they  made  a 
Feint,  which  had  infallibly  anfwer'd  their  end  if  the  bottom  of 
the  Lake  had  not  been  Clay:  For  about  Midnight  having 
Sacrific'd  Twenty  Slaves  upon  one  of  the  Lakes,  whom  they 
forc'd  to  pufh  a  Float  along,  they  made  account  to  pafs  the 


492  Some  New  Voyages 

other  the  fame  way,  making  ufe  of  Poles  inftead  of  Oars :  But 
in  regard  that  the  Poles  funk  fo  deep  into  the  Clay,  that  the 
Steerfmen  could  not  pull  them  out  again  without  great  diffi- 
culty, they  made  but  flow  difpatch ;  infomuch  that  the  Ottta- 
gamis, that  at  first  were  under  a  miftake  in  joyning  themfelves 
to  the  Slaves,  had  time  to  run  to  the  other  Lake,  where  they 
found  the  Iroquefe  about  a  Musket-fhot  off  the  Shore.  As 
foon  as  the  Iroquefe  came  to  have  but  three  Foot  Water  they 
threw  themfelves  into  the  Water  with  their  Guns  cock'd,  fuf- 
fering  at  [69]  the  fame  time  the  Fire  of  the  Otttagamis,  who 
were  not  above  three  Hundred,  there  being  Fifty  of  them  left 
to  guard  each  Barricado.  'Tis  a  wonder  the  Iroquefe  were 
not  all  cut  off  in  the  Landing,  for  they  funk  in  the  Clay  up  to 
their  Knees.  'Tis  true,  'twas  in  the  Night  time,  and  for  that 
reafon  all  the  Enemy's  Fire  might  not  bear  upon  them.  How- 
ever five  Hundred  of  them  fell  in  the  Water,  and  the  reft 
having  gain'd  the  Shoar  notwithftanding  all  the  oppofition  of 
the  Otttagamis,  attack'd  them  with  fuch  Fury  that  if  the  Hun- 
dred Men  that  were  left  for  a  Guard  to  the  Barricadoes  had 
not  run  in  to  their  Affiftance  upon  the  firft  noife  of  the  Guns, 
the  poor  Otttagamis  were  in  danger  of  falling  upon  the  Spot. 
They  fought  till  the  break  of  Day  with  wonderful  fury,  and 
that  in  the  greateft  Confufion  imaginable,  being  difpers'd  up 
and  down  a  Wood,  infomuch  that  feveral  were  kill'd  by  their 
own  Men,  who  could  not  diftinguifh  who  was  who.  The  Iro- 
quefe were  obftinately  refolv'd  not  to  yield  the  Field  of  Battel, 
out  of  regard  to  their  wounded  Men,  and  in  confederation 
that  they  would  not  have  the  Outagamis  to  take  the  Hair  of 


/;./. 


JUafctac  approctchinq  ivtiha  torch  to  hit  miftrtfi  . 
6ec/  /t-i'to  ''ejecting /its  offers  cot/ers /ter/acc   tilth 
the  Cove r/ct  . 


Ajavacje  carruuia  u  torch  to  uSetAie/e  ct  lu. 
mutrif'  iv/to  shell's  her consent  to  admit 
niniOyihivtnJOitt  the  light 


1  JMCiqesittiii.i 
'  fiee/cL/< 


~y  •»*>*" 


„tAcc£>croft/„/u 


to  ^Vor^-America.  493 

their  Dead.  But  at  laft  they  were  oblig'd  to  give  way,  with 
out  being  purfued,  and  fled  half  a  League  off  where  they 
rally'd.  I  was  inform'd  by  feveral  Iroquefe  fome  Years  after 
this  Engagement  happen'd,  that  thofe  who  furviv'd  the  En- 
gagement were  for  venturing  upon  a  new  Brum ;  but  con- 
fidering  that  they  wanted  Powder,  and  that  they  were  oblig'd 
to  return  home  through  the  Country  of  the  Sauteurs,  or  thofe 
who  live  on  the  Confines  of  the  great  Water  Falls,  they 
chang'd  their  Refolution.  But  after  all  they  were  much  out 
in  not  coming  to  a  frem  Engagement;  for  being  ftill  three 
Hundred  ftrong  they  could  not  but  [70]  have  the  better  of  it, 
for  the  Outagamis  were  not  fo  numerous  by  one  third,  having 
loft  half  their  number  in  that  fharp  Engagement,  not  to  men- 
tion that  of  the  two  Hundred  which  remain'd  there  were 
Thirty  Wounded.  In  fhort  the  Outagamis  having  intrench'd 
themfelves  in  the  fame  place  where  the  Fight  was,  took  care 
in  the  firft  place  to  drefs  the  Wounds  both  of  their  own  Men 
and  of  their  Prifoners ;  and  after  taking  the  Hair  off  the 
Heads  of  all  their  dead  Enemies,  fent  out  Scouts  to  obferve 
the  Enemy,  after  which  they  return'd  home  in  fafety. 

When  the  Outagamis  arriv'd  at  their  Villages,  the  firft 
thing  they  did  was  a  return  of  Thanks  to  the  four  Sauteurs  that 
had  given  them  Intelligence  of  the  approach  of  the  Iroquefe. 
They  proclaim'd  them  to  be  great  Mafters  of  War,  and  pre- 
fented  'em  with  one  half  of  what  they  had  got  at  Hunt- 
ing, which  amounted  to  Sixty  Thoufand  Crowns,  pretending 
farther,  that  thefe  four  Savages  ought  to  inherit  the  Beaver 
and  other  Skins   belonging  to  thofe   of  the  Outagamis  that 


494  Some  New  Voyages 

were  kill'd  in  the  Battle.  In  fine,  after  entertaining  those 
Intelligencers  with  good  Chear,  and  all  the  Marks  of  Honour 
that  were  poiTible  in  their  way,  they  lent  them  in  a  Canow  to 
Saat  St.  Mary,  by  the  way  of  the  Bay  of  Puantes,  with  a  Guard 
of  Fifty  Warriors.  The  Sauteurs  refus'd  both  their  Prefents 
and  their  Convoy,  upon  the  account  that  the  two  Nations 
were  then  at  War  with  one  another :  But  the  Outagamis  forc'd 
them  upon  'em,  and  'twas  this  that  procur'd  a  Peace  between 
them  at  the  end  of  four  Months.1 

This,  Sir,  as  I  take  it  is  fufficient  to  give  you  an  Idea  of  the 
Hazards  that  the  Savages  run  at  their  Beaver  Hunting.  In 
the  mean  time,  tho'  I  have  but  juft  made  an  end  of  two  Mili- 
tary Adventures,  yet  I  allot  the  very  next  Chapter  [71]  for 
an  account  of  their  Military  Art,  in  which  you'l  meet  with 
fomethings  that  will  ferve  for  Diverfion  to  your  felf  and 
Entertainment  to  your  Friends. 


1  Lahontan  appears  to  be  the  only  contemporary  author  who  relates  this  defeat  of 
the  Iroquois  by  the  Foxes  (Outagamis).  Allouez  speaks  of  a  war  between  them, 
about  1670;  but  it  is  strange  that  so  signal  a  victory  of  the  French-allied  Indians 
should  not  have  been  mentioned  in  the  official  documents  of  the  period.  The  story 
would  therefore  appear  to  be  of  doubtful  authenticity.  —  Ed. 


to  /VW/6-America.  495 


The  Military  Art  of  the  Savages. 

THE  Savage  call'd  Rat,  whom  I  have  mention'd  fo  often 
in  my  Letters,  has  faid  to  me  feveral  times,  that  the 
only  thing  in  the  World  that  vex'd  and  difturb'd  his  Mind 
was  the  feeing  Men  wage  War  with  Men.  Prithee,  my  Brother, 
faid  he,  do  but  look;  our  Dogs  agree  perfectly  well  with  the 
Iroquefe  Dogs,  and  thofe  of  the  Iroquefe  bear  no  Enmity  to  the 
Dogs  that  come  from  France.  /  do  not  know  any  Animal  that 
wages  War  with  others  of  its  own  Species,  excepting  Man,  who 
upon  this  fcore  is  more  Unnatural  than  the  Beafls.  For  my  part 
(continues  he)  /  am  of  the  Opinion,  that  if  the  Brutes  could 
Think  and  Reafon,  and  communicate  their  Thoughts,  'twould 
be  an  eafie  matter  for  them  to  extripate  the  Human  Race:  For, 
in  earneft,  if  the  Bears  and  Wolves  were  but  capable  of  forming 
a  Republick,  who  could  hinder  them  to  draw  together  a  Body 
of  ten  or  twelve  Thoufand,  and  to  fall  upon  us?  If  fuch  a  thing 
fliould  happen,  what  defence  can  we  make?  They  would  fcale 
our  Villages  with  the  greateft  Facility  imaginable,  and  after  the 
pulling  down  of  our  Huts  devour  our  felves.  Could  we  in  fuch 
a  Cafe  undertake  a  Hunting  Expedition,  without  running  the 
rifque  of  being  torn  in  Pieces  ?  We  fhould  then  be  reduced  to  live 
upon  Accorns  and  Roots,  without  Arms  and  without  Cloaths,  and 
to  run  the  perpetual  hazard  of  falling  into  the  Clutches  of  thefe 


496  Some  New  Voyages 

Animals.  Their  Strength  and  Nimblenefs  would  fink  all  Oppo- 
fition  from  us,  and  command  us  to  yield.  [72]  Let  us  conclude 
therefore,  my  dear  Brother,  that  this  Reafon  which  Man  boafls 
fo  much  of  is  the  greatefl  Inflrument  of  his  Mifery  ;  and  that  if  Men 
were  without  that  Faculty  of  Thinking,  Arguing  and  Speaking,  they 
would  not  imbarque  in  mutual  Wars  as  they  now  do,  without  any 
regard  to  Humanity  or  Sacred  Promifes. 

Such,  Sir,  are  the  Moral  Thoughts  of  a  Savage,  who  pre- 
tends to  Philofophife  upon  the  Cuftom  that  we  have  of  kill- 
ing Men  with  Juftice  and  Honour.  The  Jefuits  do  their 
utmoft  to  remove  this  Scruple  by  fuch  Reafons  as  they  have, 
as  they  do  upon  feveral  other  Subjects,  and  the  Savages  hear 
'em  very  gravely,  but  at  the  fame  time  they  tell  'em  that  they 
do  not  underftand  'em. 

The  Wars  of  the  Savages  are  grounded  upon  the  Right 
of  Hunting,  or  of  a  Paffage  upon  fuch  and  fuch  Grounds ; 
for  their  Limits  are  adjufled,  and  every  Nation  is  perfectly 
well  acquainted  with  the  Boundaries  of  their  own  Country. 
Now  thefe  Americans  are  as  Cruel  to  their  Enemies,  as  they 
are  True  to  their  Allies ;  for  fome  Nations  among  them  ufe 
their  Prifoners  with  the  laft  degree  of  Inhumanity;  as  I  fhall 
fhew  you  more  at  large  in  the  Sequel.  When  the  Europeans 
offer  to  Cenfure  the  Savages  for  their  barbarous  and  cruel 
Ufage,  they  reply  very  coldly,  That  Life  is  nothing,  that  they 
are  not  reveng'd  on  their  Enemies  by  cutting  their  Throats,  but  by 
putting  them  to  a  long,  tedious,  fliarp  and  lafting  Torture;  and 
that  Women    would  be  as  ch earful  Warriors  as  Men,  if  there 


to  North- America.  497 

were  nothing  to  be  fear'd  bat  bare  Death.  At  the  Age  of  Fifteen 
they  begin  to  bear  Arms,  and  lay  'em  down  at  Fifty.  If  they 
happen  to  bear  Arms  fooner  or  later,  'tis  only  in  the  way 
of  marauding,  for  they  are  not  lifted  into  the  number  of  the 
Warriors. 

[73]  The  Strength  of  the  Iroquefe  lies  in  engaging  with 
Fire- Arms  in  a  Forreft ;  for  they  moot  very  dexteroufly ; 
befides  that  they  are  very  well  vers'd  in  making  the  beft 
advantage  of  every  thing,  by  covering  themfelves  with  Trees, 
behind  which  they  ftand  ftock  ftill  after  they  have  difcharg'd, 
though  their  Enemies  be  twice  their  Number.  But  in  regard 
that  they  are  more  clumfy  and  not  fo  clever  as  the  more 
Southern  Americans,  they  have  no  Dexterity  in  handling  a 
Club ;  and  thus  it  comes  to  pafs,  that  they  are  always  worfted 
in  the  open  Field,  where  the  Clubs  are  the  only  Weapons ; 
for  which  Reafon  they  avoid  any  Engagement  in  Meadows 
or  open  Fields  as  much  as  is  poflible. 

The  Savages  never  court  an  Engagement  but  by  way  of 
Surprifal,  that  is,  the  fide  which  makes  the  firft  difcovery  is 
almoft  always  fure  of  having  the  better  of  it ;  for  they  have  it 
in  their  choice  to  make  the  Attack  either  in  the  open  Field, 
or  in  the  moft  dangerous  Defiles  or  Paffes. 

In  the  Day  time  they  take  all  the  Precaution  in  the  World 
to  cover  their  March,  by  fending  out  Scouts  on  all  Hands, 
unlefs  it  be  that  the  Party  is  fo  ftrong  as  to  fear  nothing  ;  for 
then,  indeed,  they  March  all  in  a  clofe  Body.  But  they  are 
as  Negligent  in  the  Night  time,  as  they  are  Vigilant  in  the 

32 


498  Some  New  Voyages 

Day ;  for  they  place  neither  Gentries  nor  Guards  at  the  entry 
of  their  Camp,  and  when  they  go  a  Hunting  or  Shooting  of 
Beavers,  they  are  equally  fecure  or  carelefs.  When  I  enquir'd 
into  the  reafon  of  this  bad  Difcipline,  I  was  affur'd  that  the 
Savages  did  it  by  way  of  Prefumption,  as  reckoning  fo  much 
upon  the  Reputation  of  their  Valour,  that  they  imagine  their 
Enemies  will  not  be  fo  bold  as  to  Attack  them :  And  when 
they  fend  out  Scouts  in  the  Day  time,  that  Precaution  pro- 
ceeds more  [74]  from  an  itch  to  furprife  their  Enemies,  than 
from  the  fear  of  being  furpris'd  themfelves. 

There  are  a  great  many  Savage  Nations  in  Canada  that 
tremble  at  the  very  Name  of  the  Iroquefe,  for  the  latter  are  a 
brave  fort  of  People ;  they  are  expert  Warriors,  ready  upon 
all  Enterprifes,  and  capable  to  put  them  in  Execution,  with 
all  due  Dexterity.  Tis  true,  they  are  not  fo  fprightly  as  moft 
of  their  Enemies,  nor  fo  happy  in  fighting  with  Clubs ;  and 
'tis  for  that  Reafon  that  they  never  march  but  in  numerous 
Bodies,  and  that  by  flower  Marches  than  thofe  of  the  other 
Savages.  In  fine,  you'l  fee  in  my  Lift  of  the  Nations  of  Can- 
ada, which  of  'em  are  Warlike,  and  which  are  only  qualify'd 
for  Hunting. 

The  Savages  have  a  wonderful  Talent  in  furprifing  their 
Enemies ;  for  they  can  trace  the  Footfteps  of  Men  and  Beafts 
upon  Grafs  and  Leaves,  better  than  the  Europeans  can  upon 
Snow  or  wet  Sand.  Nay,  which  is  more,  they  can  diftin- 
guifh  with  a  great  deal  of  Facility  between  frefh  Traces  and 
thofe  of  longer  ftanding,  and  can  make  a  juft  Eftimate  of  the 
number  and  kind  that  made  them.     Thefe  Trafts  they  follow 


to  North-America.  499 

whole  Days  without  being  miftaken.  This  I  have  feen  fo 
often  with  my  own  Eyes,  that  there's  no  room  left  for  the 
leaft  doubt  upon  the  matter. 

The  Warriors  never  undertake  any  thing  without  the 
Advice  of  the  Ancient  Men,  to  whom  they  propofe  their 
Projects.  Upon  a  Propofal  thus  made  the  old  Men  meet 
and  confult  upon  it;  after  which  their  Speaker  walks  out 
of  the  Council-Hut,  and  with  a  loud  Voice  Proclaims  the 
Refolution  of  the  Council,  that  all  the  Village  may  have  due 
Information  of  the  fame. 

[75]  You  muft  obferve  that  each  Village  hath  its  General 
or  Great  Head  of  the  Warriors,  who  in  confideration  of  his 
Valour,  Capacity  and  Experience  is  proclaim'd  fuch  by  an 
unanimous  Confent.1  But  after  all,  this  Title  inverts  him  with 
no  Power  over  the  Warriors ;  for  thefe  People  are  Strangers  to 
a  Military  as  well  as  to  a  Civil  Subordination.  Nay,  they  are 
fo  far  from  it,  that  if  the  great  Leader  mould  order  the  fillyeft 
and  moft  pittiful  Fellow  in  his  Army  to  do  fo  and  fo,  why 
truly,  this  fhaddow  of  a  Captain  would  receive  this  Anfwer 
from  the  Centinel,  That  what  he  orders  another  to  do  he  ought 
to  do  it  himfelf.  But  'tis  fuch  an  uncommon  thing  for  the 
Leader  to  acl  fo  indifcreetly,  that  I  Queftion  if  there  be  one 
Inftance  of  it.  However  this  mutual  Independance  is  of  no 
ill  Confequence ;  for  though  the  great  Leader  is  not  inverted 
with  Power   and   Authority,   yet    they   acquiefce   entirely  in 

1  In  most  tribes  the  civil  and  military  government  is  separate,  the  war  chief  being 
from  a  different  clan  than  the  head  chief,  and  usually  chosen  for  ability  and  valor. 
See  Powell,  "Wyandot  Government,"  in  U.  S.  Bur.  of  Eth.  Report,  1879-80, 
pp.  59-69;  Dorsey,  "  Omaha  Sociology,"  Ibid,  1881-82,  pp.  312-333.  —  Ed. 


500  Some  New  Voyages 

what  he  Propofes.  He  no  fooner  opens  his  Mouth  in  faying, 
/  think  fucb  and  fuch  a  thing  proper,  let's  detach  Ten  or  Twenty 
Men,  &c.  than  'tis  put  in  Execution,  without  the  leaft  Oppofi- 
tion.  Befides  the  great  Leader  there  are  fome  other  Leaders 
that  Head  a  certain  number  of  Warriors  who  follow  them  out 
of  Friendfhip  and  Refpect ;  and  thefe  are  not  look'd  upon  as 
Leaders  or  Commanders  by  any  other  than  their  own  Family 
or  Followers.1 

When  the  old  Men  think  it  proper  that  a  Party  of 
Warriors  mould  take  the  Field,  the  Great  Leader  who  always 
aflifts  at  the  Council,  hath  the  privilege  of  making  his  choice 
whether  he'll  Head  them  himfelf,  or  ftay  at  home  in  the  Vil- 
lage. If  he  hath  a  mind  to  go  himfelf,  he  orders  the  Cryer 
of  that  Nation  to  make  publick  Proclamation  in  all  the  Streets 
of  the  Village,  That  on  fuch  a  Day  he  gives  the  Feaft  of  War 
to  thofe  who  [76]  pleafe  to  be  prefent.  Then,  thofe  who  have 
a  mind  to  go  in  that  Party,  fend  their  Dimes  to  the  General's 
Houfe  on  the  appointed  day,  and  are  fure  to  be  there  them- 
felves  before  noon.  When  the  Company  is  all  gather'd,  the 
General  walks  out  to  a  publick  place  with  his  Club  in  his 
hand,  being  followed  by  the  Warriours  who  fit  down  round 
him.  This  done,  there  comes  fix  Savages,  with  as  many 
Kettle  Drums,  which  make  a  Clutter,  rather  than  a  Warlike 
Sound.2     Thefe  Drummers  fit  down  fquat  upon  their  Tails 


1  There  seem  to  be  some  traces  among  the  North  American  Indians  of  the  institu- 
tion of  fellowship,  or  "  comitatus" — see  Powell,  op.  cit.,  p.  68.  Private  war  parties 
were  frequently  organized,  the  instigator  becoming  leader  of  the  band  of  his  selected 
associates.  —  Ed. 

2  For  an  account  of  Indian  drums,  see  Masson,  Bourgeois,  ii,  pp.  332,  333.  —  Ed. 


to  North- America.  501 

by  a  Poft  fix'd  in  the  Center  of  the  great  Ring :  And  at  the 
fame  time,  the  General  fixes  his  Eyes  upon  the  Sun,  all  the 
Company  following  his  example,  and  makes  his  Addreffes  to 
the  Great  Spirit ;  after  which  a  Sacrifice  is  commonly  offer'd 
up.  When  this  Ceremony  is  over,  he  fings  the  Song  of  War, 
the  Drummers  beating  Time  to  him  after  their  way ;  and  at 
the  end  of  every  Period,  which  contains  one  of  his  Exploits, 
he  knocks  againft  the  Poft  with  his  Club.  When  he  has 
made  an  end  of  his  Song,  each  Warriour  fings  in  his  turn 
after  the  fame  fafhion,  provided  he  has  made  a  Campagne  be- 
fore ;  for  if  he  has  not,  he's  doom'd  to  Silence.  This  done, 
the  whole  Company  returns  to  the  General's  Hutt,  where 
they  find  their  Dinner  ready  for  them. 

If  the  General  do's  not  think  it  fit  to  Command  the  Party 
in  Perfon,  and  choofes  to  ftay  at  home  ;  the  Warriours  that 
defign  to  go  upon  the  Party,  choofe  one  of  the  Under-Leaders 
that  I  mention'd  but  now :  And  the  Under-Leader  thus  chofen, 
obferves  the  fame  Ceremonies  of  Addrefling  the  Great  Spirit, 
Sacrificing,  Singing,  and  Feafting.  The  laft  Ceremony  is  con- 
tinued every  day  till  they  March  out. 

Some  of  thefe  Parties  go  half  way,  or  three  quarters  of 
their  way  in  Canows ;  particularly  [77]  thofe  who  live  upon 
the  Banks  of  Lakes,  as  well  as  the  Iroquefe.  The  Iroqueje  have 
this  advantage  over  their  Enemies,  that  they  are  all  Arm'd 
with  good  Fire-Locks  ;  whereas  the  others  who  ufe  thofe  En- 
gines only  for  the  Shooting  of  Beafts,  have  not  above  half 
their  number  provided  with  'em :  And  'tis  for  this  reafon, 
that  the  nearer  they  come  to  their  Enemies  Country,  the  lefs 


502  Some  New  Voyages 

they  fpread  out  in  Hunting  or  Shooting,  efpecially  with  Fire- 
Arms,  the  report  of  which  might  Alarm  the  Enemy.  When 
they  come  within  thirty  or  forty  Leagues  of  danger,  they  give 
over  Hunting  and  Shooting,  being  afraid  to  fire  their  Guns ; 
and  content  themfelves  with  the  Indian  Corn,  of  which  each  of 
them  carries  a  Bag  of  ten  pound  weight ;  and  upon  which 
they  feed,  after  'tis  mix'd  with  a  little  Water  without  Boiling. 
When  the  Illinefe,  the  Ontagamis,  the  Hurons,  and  the 
Sauteurs  wage  War  with  the  Iroquefe,  and  have  a  mind  to  make 
a  bold  Attempt ;  if  there  be  but  thirty  of  them,  they'll  march 
diredlly  up  to  the  end  of  the  Village,  prefuming  that  in  cafe 
of  a  difcovery,  they  can  eafily  fave  themfelves  by  their  good 
Heels.  In  the  mean  time,  they  have  the  Precaution  to  March 
one  after  another ;  and  he  that  comes  laft  takes  care  to  ftrow 
the  Ground  with  Leaves,  in  order  to  cover  their  footfteps. 
After  they  have  paft  the  Village,  and  are  got  into  the  Iroquefe 
Country,  they  run  all  night ;  and  in  the  day  time  lye  flat  upon 
their  Bellies,  in  the  Copfes  and  Thickets,  being  fometimes 
difpers'd,  and  fometimes  all  in  a  Body.  Towards  the  Even- 
ing, or  as  foon  as  the  Sun  fets,  they  Spring  out  from  their 
Ambufcade,  and  fall  upon  every  one  they  meet,  without  fpar- 
ing  either  Age  or  Sex:  For  'tis  a  cuftomary  thing  with  thefe 
Warriours  to  fhew  no  Mercy,  not  to  Children  and  Women. 
After  they  have  finifh'd  their  Maffacre,  and  taken  [78]  the 
Hair  off  the  Heads  of  the  Dead,  they  have  the  boldnefs  to 
make  a  Funeral  Cry.  If  they  fee  any  Iroquefe  at  a  diftance, 
they  ftrain  their  Voices  to  acquaint  'em  that  they  have  kill'd 
fome  of  their  Folks,  whom  they  may  take  care  to  Bury  :    That 


to  iVor^-America.  503 

the  Action  was  accomplifh'd  by  fuch  a  Leader  and  fuch  a 
Nation.  This  done,  they  all  betake  themfelves  to  Flight  by 
different  Roads,  and  run  with  their  utmoft  fpeed  till  they 
come  to  a  general  place  of  Rendezvous,  about  thirty  or  forty 
Leagues  off.  In  the  mean  time,  the  Iroquefe  do  not  give 
themfelves  the  trouble  of  purfuing  them,  as  being  fenfible 
that  they  are  not  fo  nimble  Footed  as  to  overtake  'em. 

If  thefe  Parties  are  two  or  three  hundred  Men  ftrong, 
they'll  venture  to  enter  the  Village  in  the  Night  time  ;  making 
one  or  two  of  their  Warriours  to  Scale  the  Paliffadoes  and 
open  the  Gates,  in  cafe  they  are  fhut.  But  you  muft  know, 
that  the  Outaouas,  as  well  as  the  other  Savages  that  have  not 
fo  much  Courage  and  Activity,  content  themfelves  with  pur- 
fuing the  Iroquefe  in  the  Countries  where  they  Hunt  or  Fifri : 
For  they  dare  not  come  within  forty  Leagues  of  their  Villages, 
unlefs  they  know  of  a  place  of  Refuge,  in  cafe  of  a  difcovery 
or  purfuit :  And  there  can  be  no  other  Refuge  than  fome  little 
Forts  kept  up  by  the  French. 

The  Savages  never  take  any  Prifoners  at  the  Gates  of  their 
Enemies  Villages;  by  reafon  of  the  Expedition  they  are  oblig'd 
to  make  in  running  Night  and  Day  to  fave  themfelves :  'Tis 
in  the  Hunting  and  Fifhing  Countries,  and  in  the  other  places 
that  afford  them  an  opportunity  of  furprizing  their  Enemy, 
that  they  take  'em  Prifoners :  For  upon  fuch  occafions,  the 
weaker  fide  being  forc'd  to  give  way,  and  to  maintain  a  run- 
ning Fight  without  any  Order  or  Difcipline,  [79]  while  every 
one  flies  his  own  way,  'tis  not  poflible  but  that  the  Con- 
querors muft  take  Prifoners:  And  there's  always  fome  ftrong 


504  Some  New  Voyages 

brawny  Savages  who  know  how  to  throw  down  the  Prifoner 
dextroufly,  and  to  bind  him  in  a  moment.  But  there  are 
fome  of  the  defeated  Parties,  who  choofe  rather  to  kill  them- 
felves  than  to  be  took  Prifoners ;  and  others  are  fo  obftinate 
that  they  mull  be  Wounded  before  they  can  be  catch'd. 
As  foon  as  a  Savage  is  Fetter'd,  he  fings  his  Death  Song, 
after  the  manner  defcrib'd  in  my  23d  Letter.  The  Iroquefe 
that  have  the  misfortune  to  be  catch'd,  have  nothing  to  expect 
but  fearful  Torture,  if  they  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Oumamis, 
the  Outaouas,  the  Algonkins,  and  the  Savages  of  Acadia :  For 
thefe  People  are  extream  cruel  to  their  Prifoners.1  The  leaft 
Punifhment  they  inflict  upon  'em,  is,  that  of  obliging  the 
poor  Wretches  to  put  their  Finger  into  the  mouth  of  a  lighted 
Pipe ;  which  makes  an  agreeable  diverfion  to  the  Conqueror 
in  his  Journey  home.  The  other  Nations  ufe  their  Prifoners 
with  much  more  Humanity.  From  hence  we  may  conclude, 
that  we  ought  to  make  a  great  difference  between  the  feveral 
Nations  of  Canada;  fome  of  which  are  Warlike,  others  Cow- 
ardly; fome  a  lively  Active  People,  others  Heavy  and  Dull: 
In  a  Word,  the  Cafe  is  the  fame  in  America  as  it  is  in  Europe, 
where  every  Nation  has  not  the  Virtues  or  Vices  of  another. 
For  the  Iroquefe,  and  the  other  Nations  that  I  nam'd  along 
with  them,  burn  all  their  Prifoners;  whereas  the  other  Nations 
content  themfelves  with  the  keeping  of  them  in  Slavery, 
without  putting  any  to  Death.  'Tis  the  firft  fort  that  I  mean 
to  fpeak  of  in  the  three  enfuing  Paragraphs. 


1  The  torture  of  Indian  captives,  and  the  barbarities  therein  committed,  are  well- 
known.  For  early  descriptions,  see  Jes.  Rel.,  i,  p.  271  ;  iv,  pp.  199,  201  ;  x,  p. 
227.  —  Ed. 


to  North- America.  505 

[80]  As  foon  as  a  party  of  Barbarians  approach  their  own 
Village,  they  make  as  many  Dead-Cries  as  they  have  loft  Men; 
and  when  they  come  within  a  Mufquet-Shot  of  the  Village, 
they  renew  the  mournful  Tune;  and  repeat  it  for  a  certain 
number  of  times  anfwerable  to  the  number  of  the  flain  among 
the  Enemies.  Then  the  Youths  under  fixteen,  and  above 
twelve  years  of  age,  Arm  themfelves  with  Sticks,  and  make 
a  Lane  in  order  to  beat  the  Prifoners,  which  they  put  in 
execution  as  foon  as  the  Warriours  have  made  their  entry, 
carrying  the  Hair  of  thofe  they  have  flain  upon  the  end 
of  their  Bows. 

The  next  day,  the  old  Men  meet  in  Council  upon  the 
diftribution  of  the  Prifoners,  which  are  commonly  prefented 
to  fuch  Married  Women  or  Maids  as  have  loft  Relations  in 
the  Expedition,  and  to  thofe  that  want  Slaves.  After  the 
diftribution  is  adjufted,  three  or  four  Young  Scoundrels  of  the 
Age  of  fifteen,  take  the  Prifoners  and  conduct  them  to  thefe 
Women  or  Girles.  Now,  if  the  Woman  to  whom  the  prefent 
is  made,  means  that  the  poor  Wretch  fhould  die,  fhe  gives 
him  to  underftand  that  her  Father,  her  Brother,  her  Hus- 
band, &c.  having  no  Slaves  to  ferve  them  in  the  Country 
of  the  Dead,  it  behoves  him  to  take  a  Journey  thither  out 
of  hand.  If  evidence  be  brought  that  the  poor  Slave  has 
kill'd  either  Women  or  Children  in  his  lifetime,  the  young 
Executioners  lead  him  to  a  Woodpile,  where  he  is  forc'd 
to  undergo  the  difmal  Torments  mentioned  in  my  23d  Letter; 
and  fometimes  fomewhat  that  is  yet  more  terrible.  But  if  the 
unfortunate  Prifoner  can  make  it  appear  that  he  only  kill'd 


506  Some  New  Voyages 

Men,  they  content  themfelves  with  the  Shooting  of  him. 
If  the  Woman  or  Girl  has  a  mind  to  fave  the  Prifoners  life 
(which  often  happens)  fhe  takes  him  by  the  hand;  and  [81] 
after  conducting  him  into  the  Hut,  cuts  his  Bonds  and  orders 
him  Cloaths,  Arms,  Victuals  and  Tobacco.  This  favour  is 
ufually  accompany'd  with  thefe  words.  /  have  given  thee  thy 
life,  I  have  knock' d  off  thy  chains,  pluck  up  a  good  heart,  ferve  me 
well,  be  not  ill  minded,  and  thou  /halt  have  whereupon  to  comfort 
thee  for  the  lofs  of  thy  Country  and  thy  Relations.  Sometimes  the 
Iroquefe  Women  adopt  the  Slaves  that  are  prefented  to  'em, 
and  then  they  are  look'd  upon  as  Members  of  the  Nation. 
As  for  the  Women  Prifoners  they  are  diftributed  among  the 
Men,  who  are  fure  to  grant  'em  their  lives.1 

You  muft  take  notice  that  the  Savages  of  Canada  never 
exchange  their  Prifoners.2  As  foon  as  they  are  put  in  Chains, 
their  Relations  and  the  whole  Nation  to  which  they  retain, 
look  upon  'em  as  dead ;  unlefs  it  be  that  they  were  fo  much 
Wounded  when  they  were  taken,  that  they  could  not  poflibly 
kill  themfelves.  Thefe  indeed  they  receive  when  they  make 
their  efcape  ;  but  if  the  other  Prifoners  fhould  offer  to  return, 
they  would  be  contemn'd  by  their  neareft  Relations,  and  no 
body  would  receive  'em.  The  way  of  waging  War  among 
the  Savages  is  fo  harfh,  that  one  muft  have  a  Body  of  Steel  to 


1This  custom  of  adoption  of  prisoners  was  one  of  great  value  to  the  white  cap- 
tives, and  saved  the  lives  of  many.  See  Withers,  Chronicles  of  Border  Warfare 
(Thwaites's  ed.,  Cincinnati,  1895),  for  typical  instances.  —  Ed. 

2  The  author  means  that  captives  are  not  exchanged  while  a  state  of  war  persists 
between  the  tribes.  Upon  the  arrangement  of  peace,  the  captives  are  all  returned. 
See  Wis.  Hist.  Colls.,  xvi,  pp.  +47-4S1  5  465-467.  — Ed. 


to  iV rorth- America.  507 

bear  the  Fatigues  they  are  oblig'd  to  undergo.  Now  if  we 
joyn  to  this  inconveniency  that  of  their  giving  but  little  Quar- 
ter to  one  another ;  and  for  the  moft  part,  without  any  regard 
either  to  Women  or  Children,  we  will  not  think  it  ftrange  that 
the  number  of  their  Warriours  is  fo  fmall,  that  fometimes  one 
Nation  can  fcarce  mufter  up  a  thoufand. 

The  Savages  are  never  ram  in  declaring  War ;  they  hold 
frequent  Councils  before  they  refolve  upon  it,  and  muft  be 
very  well  affur'd  of  the  fteddinefs  of  the  Neighbouring  Na- 
tions, whofe  [82]  Alliance  or  Neutrality  they  require.  Befides, 
before  they  come  to  fuch  a  refolution,  they  make  it  their  bufi- 
nefs  to  fathom  the  Minds  of  fuch  Nations  as  lye  remote ;  to 
the  end  that  they  may  take  juft  meafures,  by  weighing  all  the 
Confequences  ferioufly,  and  endeavouring  to  forefee  all  the 
accidents  that  may  happen.  They  ufe  the  Precaution  of  fend- 
ing Deputies  to  the  People  whom  they  propofe  for  their 
Allies,  to  make  a  narrow  inquiry  whether  their  Old  Men  have 
Heads  well  turn'd  for  Government,  and  for  the  giving  of 
judicious  and  feafonable  Counfels  to  their  Warriours,  whofe 
number  they  want  to  know  as  well  as  their  Valour  and  Ex- 
perience. The  next  thing  that  they  have  in  view,  is  the 
carrying  on  of  the  Trade  of  Skins  with  the  French  without 
difadvantage,  and  the  Hunting  of  Beavers  in  Winter  without 
expofing  themfelves  to  danger.  After  all,  they  make  this  pro- 
pofal  to  their  Allies  ;  that  they  (hall  engage  not  to  put  an  end 
to  the  War  till  their  Enemies  are  intirely  deftroy'd,  or  elfe 
oblig'd  to  abdicate  their  Country. 

Their  way  of  declaring  War  is  this:  They  fend  back  to 


508  Some  New  Voyages 

the  Nation  that  they  have  a  mind  to  quarrel  with,  a  Slave  of 
the  fame  Country ;  with  orders  to  carry  to  the  Village  of  his 
own  Nation  an  Axe,  the  Handle  of  which  is  painted  red  and 
black.  Sometimes  they  fend  three  or  four  fuch  Slaves,  oblig- 
ing them  to  promife  before  hand,  that  they  fhall  not  bear 
Arms  againft  them ;  and  commonly  this  Promife  is  religioufly 
obferv'd.1 

It  remains  only  to  acquaint  you  how  they  make  Peace  ;  you 
muft  know  that  the  Savages  never  think  of  an  Accommoda- 
tion till  after  a  long  War :  But  when  they  are  fenfible  that  'tis 
their  Intereft  to  come  to  it  they  detach  five,  or  ten,  or  fifteen, 
or  twenty  Warriors,  to  make  a  [83]  Propofal  to  the  Enemies. 
Thefe  Commiflioners  go  fometimes  by  Land,  and  fometimes 
in  Canows,  and  always  carry  the  great  Calumet  of  Peace  in 
their  Hand,  much  after  the  fame  manner  as  a  Cornet  carries 
his  Standard.  I  fet  forth  in  my  Seventh  Letter  what  a  pro- 
found Veneration  all  the  Savages  of  Canada  have  for  this 
famous  Pipe.  There  was  not  one  Inftance  of  their  Violating 
the  Sacred  Rights  of  this  Pipe  before  the  Embaffy  of  Chevalier 
Do,  at  which  time  they  took  occafion  to  revenge  the  Bufinefs 
of  the  Rat,  as  I  gave  you  to  know  in  my  Seventeenth  Letter. 
If  the  Commiffioners  of  Peace  march  by  Land,  as  foon  as  they 
arrive  within  a  Musket-mot  of  the  Village,  fome  young  Men 
march  out  and  poft  themfelves  in  an  oval  Figure.  This  done, 
the  Commiflioner  that  carries  that  great  fign  of  Peace,  makes 
up  towards  them,  finging  and  dancing  the  Calumet  Dance; 


1  This  is  a  rare  custom,  the  object  being  to  surprise  the  enemy  before  he  is  pre- 
pared for  war.  —  Ed. 


to  North- America.  509 

-which  he  continues  to  do  while  the  old  Men  meet  in  Council. 
If  the  Inhabitants  of  the  Village  do  not  think  it  proper  to 
accept  of  the  Propofal  of  Peace,  their  Orator  or  Speaker 
makes  a  Harangue  to  the  Envoy  that  carries  the  Calumet, 
who  upon  that  goes  and  rejoins  his  Company.  This  Pacifick 
Retinue  is  regal'd  with  Prefents  of  Tents,  Corn,  Meat  and 
Fifh;  but  at  the  fame  time  they  are  acquainted  that  they  muft 
depart  their  Country  the  next  Day.  If  on  the  other  Hand, 
the  old  Men  agree  to  the  conclufion  of  a  Peace,  they  march 
out  and  meet  the  Commiflioners,  and  after  conducting  the 
whole  Company  into  the  Village,  provide  them  with  extra- 
ordinary good  Lodgings  and  a  plentiful  Table,  during  the 
whole  courfe  of  the  Negotiation.  When  the  Commiffioners 
come  by  Water  they  fend  out  a  Canow  while  the  reft  lye  by ; 
and  as  foon  as  this  Canow  comes  near  to  the  Village,  the  In- 
habitants [84]  of  the  Village  fend  out  another  to  meet  it,  and 
conduct  the  Propofer  of  Peace  to  their  Habitations,  where  the 
Ceremonies  are  perform'd  after  the  fame  manner  as  before.1 
This  great  Calumet  is  likewife  made  ufe  of  by  the  Confederate 
Savages,  that  demand  Paffage  thro'  the  Country  of  their 
Allies,  whether  by  Land  or  Water,  in  purfuance  of  Warlike 
or  Hunting  Expeditions. 


1  The  person  of  an  envoy  was  sacred  among  Indian  tribes,  and  to  maltreat  one 
was  the  worst  of  insults.  Dorsey  describes  similar  ceremonies  as  persisting  among  the 
Omaha.     U.  S.  Bur.  of  Eth.  Report,  1881-82,  p.  368.  — Ed. 


5io  Some  New  Voyages 


A  View  of  the  Heraldry,,  or  the  Coats  of  Arms 
of  the  Savages. 

AFTER  a  perufal  of  the  former  Accounts  I  fent  you  of  the 
Ignorance  of  the  Savages  with  reference  to  Sciences, 
you  will  not  think  it  ftrange  that  they  are  unacquainted  with 
Heraldry.  The  Figures  you  have  reprefented  in  this  Cut 
will  certainly  appear  ridiculous  to  you,  and  indeed  they  are 
nothing  lefs  :  But  after  all  you'l  content  your  felf  with  excuf- 
ing  thefe  poor  Wretches,  without  rallying  upon  their  extrava- 
gant Fancies.  They  make  ufe  of  the  Blazoning  reprefented 
in  the  Cut,  for  the  following  Purpofes.1 

When  a  Party  of  Savages  have  routed  their  Enemies  in 
any  Place  whatfoever,  the  Conquerours  take  care  to  pull  the 
Bark  off  the  Trees  for  the  height  of  five  or  fix  Foot  in  all 
Places  where  they  flop  in  returning  to  their  own  Country  ; 
and  in  honour  of  their  Victory  paint  certain  Images  with  Coal 
pounded  and  beat  up  with  Fat  and  Oyl.     Thefe  Pictures, 


1  Lahontan's  somewhat  absurd  and  distorted  description  of  Indian  heraldry  prob- 
ably arose  from  his  misconception  of  the  institution  of  totemism  —  a  primitive  super- 
stition by  which  each  gens  or  clan  of  a  tribe  adopted  some  animal  as  a  totem  or 
mythical  protector.  One  of  the  earliest  uses  of  the  term  "totemism"  was  by  John 
Long  (see  Thwaites,  Early  Western  Travels,  ii,  pp.  123-125),  but  there  is  now  a 
large  literature  upon  this  subject.  See  M'Lennan,  Patriarchal  Theory  ;  Lang,  Myth, 
Ritual,  and  Religion  (London,  1887);  Brinton,  Myths  of  Ne-iv  World ;  and  sociolog- 
ical articles  in  U.  S.  Bur.  of  Eth.  Reports,  already  cited.  —  Ed. 


to  North- America.  511 

which  are  defign'd  and  explain'd  in  the  infuing  Chapter,  con- 
tinue upon  the  peel'd  Tree  for  ten  or  twelve  [85]  Years,  as  if 
they  were  Grav'd,  without  being  defac'd  by  the  Rain. 

This  they  do  to  give  all  Paffangers  to  underftand  what 
Exploits  they  have  done.  The  Arms  for  the  Nation,  and 
fometimes  a  particular  Mark  for  the  Leader  of  the  Party,  are 
painted  in  Colours  upon  thefe  ftrip'd  Trees  ;  and  for  that 
reafon  'twil  not  be  improper  to  fubjoin  a  Defcription  of  'em. 

The  five  Outaouafe  Nations  have  a  Sinople  or  Green  Field, 
with  four  Elks  in  Sable  Canton'd,  and  looking  to  the  four 
Corners  of  the  Efcutcheon,  there  being  a  heap  of  Sand  in  the 
middle. 

The  Illinefe  bear  a  Beech  Leaf  with  a  Butterfly  Argent. 

The  NadoueJJis  or  Scioux  have  a  Squirrel  Gules,  gnawing  a 
Citron  Or. 

The  Hurons  bear  a  Beaver  Sable,  fet  fquat  upon  a  Beaver 
Kennel  Argent,  the  midft  of  a  Pool  or  Lake. 

The  Outagatnis  bear  a  Meadow  Sinople,  crofs'd  by  a  wind- 
ing River  Pale,  with  two  Foxes  Gules  at  the  two  Extremities 
of  the  River,  in  Chief  and  Point. 

The  Pouteoutamis  call'd  Puants  bear  a  Dog  in  Argent,  deep- 
ing upon  a  Mat  d'  Or.  Thefe  People  obferve  the  Rules  of 
Blazoning  lefs  than  the  other  Nations. 

The  Oumamis  have  a  Bear  Sable,  pulling  down  with  his  two 
Paws  a  Tree  Sinople  moffy,  and  laid  along  the  Efcutcheon. 

The  Oucabipoues,  call'd  Sauteurs,  have  an  Eagle  Sable, 
pearching  upon  the  top  of  a  Rock  Argent,  and  devouring  an 
Owl  Gules. 


5i2  Some  New  Voyages 


[86]  An  Explication  of  the  Hieroglypbicks  that  ft  and  oppo- 
fite  to  the  Letters  ABCDEFGHIK,  being 
placed  at  the  fide  of  a  Column  reprefenting  the  Foot 
of  a  fuppos^d  Tree. 

IF  we  take  the  Word  Hieroglyphick  in  its  natural  Senfe,  'tis 
only  a  Reprefentation  of  Sacred  and  Divine  Objects,  Cal- 
culated according  to  the  Ideas  we  have  of  'em.  But  without 
any  regard  to  the  Etymology,  I  choofe  rather  to  make  ufe  of 
the  common  Priviledge  of  an  infinity  of  Authors,  in  beftowing 
the  Title  of  Hieroglyphick  Symbols  upon  all  thefe  Figures 
that  correfpond  to  the  following  Letters.1 

A.  Oppofite  to  this  Letter  you  fee  the  Arms  of  France, 
with  an  Ax  above.  Now  the  Ax  is  a  Symbol  of  War  among 
the  Savages,  as  the  Calumet  is  the  Bond  of  Peace :  So  that 
this  imports,  that  the  French  have  taken  up  the  Ax,  or  have 
made  a  Warlike  Expedition  with  as  many  tens  of  Men  as  there 
are  Marks  or  Points  round  the  Figure.  Thefe  Marks  you 
fee  are  Eighteen  in  number,  and  fo  they  fignifie  an  Hundred 
and  eighty  Warriors. 

*On  the  subject  of  picture  writing  see  Mallery,  "  Picture-Writing  of  American 
Indians"  in  U.  S.  Bur.  of  Eth.  Report,  1888-89;  Jes.  Rel.,  lxvii,  p.  227; 
Hoffman,  "On  Native  Indian  Pictographs,"  in  Catholic  University  Bulletin  (Wash- 
ington), April,  1897.  — Ed. 


to  North- America.  513 

B.  Over  againft  this  Letter  you  meet  with  a  Mountain 
that  reprefents  the  City  of  Monreal,  (according  to  the  Sav- 
ages) and  the  Fowl  upon  the  Wing  at  the  top  fignifies  De- 
parture. The  Moon  upon  the  Back  of  the  Stag  fignifies  the 
firft  Quarter  of  the  July  Moon,  which  is  call'd  the  Stag-Moon. 

[87]  C.  Oppofite  to  this  Letter  you  defcry  a  Canow, 
importing  that  they  have  travel'd  by  Water  as  many  Days 
as  you  fee  Huts  in  the  Figure,  i.e.  21  Days. 

D.  Upon  the  fame  parallel  with  this  Letter  you  fee  a 
Foot,  importing  that  after  their  Voyage  by  Water  they 
march'd  on  Foot  as  many  Days  as  there  are  Huts  defign'd  ; 
that  is,  feven  Days  Journeys  for  Warriors,  each  Days  Journey 
being  as  much  as  five  common  French  Leagues,  or  five  of 
thofe  which  are  reckon'd  to  be  twenty  in  a  Degree. 

E.  By  this  Letter  you  perceive  a  Hand  and  three  Huts, 
which  fignifie  that  they  are  got  within  three  Days  Journey 
of  the  Iroquefe  Tfonnontouans,  whofe  Arms  are  a  Hut  with  two 
Trees  leaning  downwards,  as  you  fee  them  drawn.  The  Sun 
imports  that  they  were  juft  to  the  Eaftward  of  the  Village : 
For  you  muft  obferve,  that  if  they  had  march'd  to  the  Weft- 
ward  the  Arms  of  thefe  Savages  had  been  plac'd  where  the 
Hand  is,  and  the  Hand  had  been  turn'd  and  plac'd  where 
you  now  fee  the  Hut  with  the  two  Trees. 

F.  Oppofite  to  this  Letter  you  perceive  twelve  Marks, 
fignifying  fo  many  times  ten  Men,  like  thofe  at  the  Letter  A. 
The  Hut  with  the  two  Trees  being  the  Arms  of  the  Tfonnon- 
touans fhews  that  they  were  of  that  Nation ;  and  the  Man  in  a 

lying  pofture  fpeaks  that  they  were  furpris'd. 
33 


514  Some  New  Voyages 

G.  In  the  row  which  anfwers  to  this  Letter  there  appears 
a  Club  and  eleven  Heads,  importing  that  they  had  kill'd 
eleven  Tfonnontoiians,  and  the  five  Men  ftanding  upright  upon 
the  five  Marks  fignifie,  that  they  took  as  many  times  ten 
Prifoners  of  War. 

[88]  H.  Oppofite  to  this  Letter  you  fee  nine  Heads  in  an 
Arch,  the  meaning  of  which  is,  that  nine  of  the  Aggreffors 
or  of  the  Victorious  fide  (which  I  fuppofed  to  be  French) 
were  kill'd ;  and  the  twelve  Marks  underneath  fignifie  that  as 
many  were  Wounded. 

7.  Oppofite  to  this  Letter  you  fee  Arrows  flying  in  the 
Air,  fome  to  one  fide  and  fome  to  the  other,  importing  a 
vigorous  Defence  on  both  fides. 

K.  At  this  Letter  you  fee  the  Arrows  all  pointed  one  way, 
which  fpeaks  the  worfted  Party  either  flying  or  fighting  upon 
a  Retreat  in  diforder. 

The  meaning  of  the  whole  is  in  a  few  Words  as  follows. 
An  Hundred  and  eighty  French  Men  fet  out  from  Monreal 
in  the  firft  Quarter  of  the  July  Moon,  and  fail'd  twenty  one 
Days;  after  which  they  march'd  thirty  five  Leagues  over  Land 
and  furpris'd  a  hundred  and  twenty  Tfonnontoiians  on  the  Eaft 
fide  of  their  Village,  eleven  of  whom  were  Kill'd,  and  fifty 
taken  Prifoners;  the  French  fuftaining  the  lofs  of  nine  Kill'd 
and  twelve  Wounded,  after  a  very  obftinate  Engagement.1 


iThe  drawings  accompanying  this  description  are  evidently  the  work  of  a 
European  quite  unacquainted  with  Indian  pictographs.  For  correct  drawings  of 
Indian  representations  of  expeditions  and  battles,  see  illustrations  in  Mallery,  op. 
cit.,  pp.  552-556;  Thwaites,  "Atlas  of  Maximilien's  Voyage,"  in  Early  Western 
Travels,  xxv.  —  Ed. 


to  North- America,  515 

This  may  ferve  to  prompt  you  and  me  to  return  thanks 
to  God  for  vouchfafing  to  us  the  means  of  expreffmg  our 
Thoughts  by  the  bare  ranking  of  twenty  three  Letters,  and 
above  all  of  Writing  in  lefs  than  a  Minute  a  Dlfcourfe  that 
the  Americans  cannot  Decypher  with  their  impertinent  Hiero- 
glyphicks  in  the  fpace  of  an  Hour.  Though  the  number  of 
thofe  dark  Symbols  is  of  no  large  extent,  yet  'tis  very  per- 
plexing to  an  European;  for  which  Reafon  I  have  contented 
my  felf  in  learning  only  fuch  of  'em  as  are  moft  Effential ; 
the  knowledge  of  which  [89]  I  owe  to  Neceffity  more  than 
Curiofity.  I  could  fend  you  others  that  are  as  extravagant 
as  thefe  I  now  fend  you ;  but  confidering  that  they  will  be  of 
no  ufe  to  you,  I  choofe  to  fave  my  felf  the  labour  of  drawing 
them  upon  Paper,  and  you  the  trouble  of  looking  'em  over. 

I  am,  Sir, 

Tours,  &c. 


[90]      A 

CONFERENCE 

OR 

DIALOGUE 

BETWEEN    THE 

AUTHOR   and  ADARIO, 

A  Noted  Man  among  the 

SAVAGES. 

CONTAINING 

A  Circumflantial  View  of  the  Cuftoms  and  Humours 
of  that  People. 

Lahon-  T  AM  infinitely  well  pleas'd,  my  dear  Jdario,  that 
tan.  JL  I  have  an  opportunity  of  reafoning  with  you 
upon  a  Subject  of  the  greateft  Importance  ;  for  my  bufinefs 
is  to  unfold  to  you  the  great  Truths  of  Chriftianity. 

Adario,  I  am  ready  to  hear  thee,  my  dear  Brother,  in  order 
to  be  inform'd  of  a  great  many  things  that  the  Jefuits  have 
been  Preaching  up  [91]  for  a  long  time;  and  I  would  have 
us  to  difcourfe  together  with  all  the  freedom  that  may 
be.     If  your  Belief   is   the   fame  with   that    of   the  Jefuits, 


5i8  Some  New  Voyages 

'tis  in  vain  to  enter  into  a  Conference;  for  they  have  enter- 
tain'd  me  with  fo  many  Fabulous  and  Romantick  Stories, 
that  all  the  credit  I  can  give  'em,  is  to  believe,  that  they 
have  more  Senfe  than  to  believe  themfelves. 

Lahontan.  I  do  not  know  what  they  have  faid  to  you ;  but 
I  am  apt  to  believe  that  their  Words  and  mine  will  agree  very 
well  together.  The  Chriftian  Religion  is  a  Religion  that  Men 
ought  to  profefs  in  order  to  obtain  a  place  in  Heaven.  God 
hath  permitted  the  difcovery  of  America,  meaning  to  fave  all 
Nations  that  will  follow  the  Laws  of  Chriftianity.  'Twas  his 
Divine  Pleafure  that  the  Gofpel  mould  be  Preach'd  to  thy 
Nation,  that  they  may  be  inform'd  of  the  true  way  to  Para- 
dife,  the  bleffed  Manfion  of  good  Souls.  'Tis  pity  thou  wilt 
not  be  perfwaded  to  make  the  beft  ufe  of  the  Favours  and 
the  Talents  that  God  hath  beftow'd  upon  thee.  Life  is  fhort; 
the  Hour  of  our  Death  is  uncertain,  and  Time  is  precious. 
Undeceive  thy  felf  therefore,  as  to  the  imagin'd  Severity 
of  Chriftianity,  and  imbrace  it  without  delay,  regrating  the 
lofs  of  thofe  Days  thou  has  fpent  in  Ignorance,  without  a  due 
fenfe  of  Religion  and  Worfhip,  and  without  the  knowlege  of 
the  true  God. 

Adario.  How  do  you  mean,  without  the  Knowledge  of  the 
True  God?  What!  are  you  mad?  Do'ft  thou  believe  we  are 
void  of  Religion,  after  thou  haft  dwelt  fo  long  amongft  us? 
Do'ft  not  thee  know  in  the  firft  place,  that  we  acknowledge 
a  Creator  of  the  Univerfe,  under  the  Title  of  the  Great  Spirit 
or  Mafter  of  Life ;  whom  we  believe  to  be  in  every  thing, 
and  to  be  unconfin'd  to  Limits?     2.  That  we  own  the  Immor- 


to  North- America.  519 

tality  of  the  Soul.1  [92]  3.  That  the  Great  Spirit  has  fur- 
nifh'd  us  with  a  Rational  Faculty,  capable  of  diftinguifhing 
Good  from  Evil,  as  much  as  Heaven  from  Earth ;  to  the  end 
that  we  might  Religiousfly  obferve  the  true  Meafures  of  Juftice 
and  Wifdom.  4.  That  the  Tranquility  and  Serenity  of  the 
Soul  pleafes  the  Great  Mafter  of  Life :  And  on  the  other 
hand,  that  he  abhors  trouble  and  anxiety  of  Mind,  becaufe 
it  renders  Men  Wicked.  5.  That  Life  is  a  Dream,  and  Death 
the  Seafon  of  Awaking,  in  which  the  Soul  fees  and  knows  the 
Nature  and  Quality  of  all  things,  whether  vifible  or  invifible. 
6.  That  the  utmoft  reach  of  our  Minds  can't  go  one  Inch 
above  the  Surface  of  the  Earth :  So  that  we  ought  not  to  cor- 
rupt and  fpoil  it  by  endeavouring  to  pry  into  Invifible  and 
Improbable  things.  This  my  dear  Friend  is  Our  Belief,  and 
we  act  up  to  it  with  the  greateft  Exaclnefs.  We  believe  that 
we  fhall  go  to  the  Country  of  Souls  after  death ;  but  we  have 
no  fuch  apprehenfion  as  you  have,  of  a  good  and  bad  Manfion 
after  this  Life,  provided  for  the  good  and  bad  Souls ;  for  we 
cannot  tell  whether  every  thing  that  appears  faulty  to  Men, 
is  fo  in  the  Eyes  of  God.  If  your  Religion  differs  from 
ours,  it  do's  not  follow  that  we  have  none  at  all.  Thou 
knoweft  that  I  have  been  in  France ,  New-York  and  Quebec; 
where  I  Study'd  the  Cuftoms  and  Doctrines  of  the  Englifli 
and  French?     The  Jefuits  allege,  that  out  of  five  or  fix  hun- 

1On  Indian  religious  beliefs,  see  pp.  435,  note  1,  ante. —  Ed. 

2  For  a  brief  biography  of  Adario  see  p.  149,  note  2,  ante.  Lahontan  is  the 
only  contemporary  authority  who  speaks  of  the  travels  of  this  interesting  savage  ; 
but  a  letter  of  1691  mentions  a  Huron  who  is  about  to  pass  into  France,  and  wishes 
to  see  the  king.  Possibly  this  may  have  been  Adario,  the  most  noted  of  his  tribe. 
See  Canadian  Archives,  1885,  p.  Ivi.  —  Ed. 


520  Some  New  Voyages 

dred  forts  of  Religions,  there's  only  one  that  is  the  good 
and  the  true  Religion,  and  that's  their  own ;  out  of  which 
no  Man  fhall  'fcape  the  Flames  of  a  Fire  that  will  burn  his 
Soul  to  all  Eternity.  This  is  their  allegation :  But  when  they 
have  faid  all,  they  cannot  offer  any  Proof  for  it. 

[93]  Lahontan.  They  have  a  great  deal  of  reafon,  Adario, 
to  affert  that  there  are  bad  Souls  ;  for  without  ftraggling  far 
for  a  Proof,  they  need  only  to  give  thine  for  an  Inftance.  He 
that  is  unacquainted  with  the  Truths  of  the  Chriftian  Religion, 
is  not  capable  of  receiving  a  Proof.  All  that  thou  haft  offer'd 
in  thy  own  defence  is  prodigious  Madnefs.  The  Country  of 
Souls  that  thou  fpeakeft  of  is  only  a  Chimerical  Hunting 
Country :  Whereas  our  Holy  Scriptures  inform  us  of  a  Para- 
dife,  Seated  above  the  remoteft  Stars,  where  God  does  actually 
refide ;  being  incircled  with  Glory,  and  the  Souls  of  all  the 
Faithful  Chriftians.  The  fame  very  Scriptures  make  mention 
of  a  Hell,  which  we  take  to  be  Situated  in  the  Centre  of  the 
Earth :  And  in  which  the  Souls  of  all  fuch  as  reject  Chrif- 
tianity,  as  well  as  thofe  of  bad  Chriftians,  will  burn  for  ever 
without  Confumption.  This  is  a  Truth  that  you  ought  to 
think  of. 

Adario.  Thefe  Holy  Scriptures  that  thou  quoteft  every 
foot,  as  well  as  the  Jefuits,  require  that  mighty  Faith  which  the 
Good  Fathers  are  always  teazing  us  with.  But  this  can  be 
nothing  but  a  perfuafion  :  To  believe,  Imports  no  more  than 
to  be  perfuaded  of  a  thing:  and  to  be  perfuaded  or  convinc'd, 
is  to  fee  a  thing  with  one's  eyes,  or  to  have  it  recommended 
by  clear  and  folid  Truths.     Now  how  can  I  have  that  Faith, 


to  North- America.  521 

fince  thou  canft  neither  prove  a  tittle  of  what  thou  fay'ft,  nor 
fhew  it  me  before  my  eyes.  Believe  me,  my  Friend  ;  do  not 
wrap  up  thy  Mind  in  obfcurity;  give  over  the  vifionary 
thoughts  of  thefe  Holy  Scriptures,  or  elfe  let  us  make  an  end 
of  our  Conferences  upon  that  Head;  for  according  to  our 
Principles,  we  muft  have  probability  in  every  thing  we  admit 
of.  What  Ground  haft  thou  for  the  Deftiny  of  the  good 
Souls,  who  are  [94]  lodg'd  with  the  Great  Spirit  above  the 
Stars,  or  the  Fate  of  the  bad  ones  that  fhall  burn  for  ever  in 
the  Centre  of  the  Earth?  Thou  canft  not  but  charge  God 
with  Tyranny,  if  thou  believeft  that  he  Created  but  one  fingle 
Man,  with  intent  to  render  him  eternally  Miferable  amidft  the 
Flames  in  the  Centre  of  the  Earth.  I  know  you'll  pretend, 
that  the  Holy  Scriptures  prove  that  Great  Truth :  But  grant- 
ing it  to  be  fo,  then  the  Earth  muft  be  of  eternal  Duration ; 
which  the  Jefidts  deny.  That  flaming  Place  muft  therefore 
ceafe  to  be,  when  the  Earth  comes  to  be  confum'd.  Befides, 
how  canft  thou  imagine,  that  the  Soul  which  is  a  pure  Spirit,  a 
thoufand  times  fubtiler  and  lighter  than  Smoak ;  how  canft 
thou  imagine,  I  fay,  that  this  airy  Being  fhould  move  to  the 
Centre  of  the  Earth,  contrary  to  its  natural  tendency?  'Tis 
more  likely,  it  fhould  mount  upwards  and  fly  to  the  Sun, 
where  you  may  fix  that  fiery  place  more  reafonably ;  efpecially 
confidering  that  this  Star  is  much  bigger,  and  infinitely  more 
hot  than  the  Earth. 

Lahontan.  Hark  ye  me,  my  dear  Adario,  thy  Blindnefs  is 
fcrew'd  up  to  an  extremity,  and  the  hardnefs  of  thy  Heart 
makes  thee  rejecl  this  Faith  and  thefe  Scriptures :  the  truth 


522  Some  New  Voyages 

of  which  does  eafily  appear,  if  one  would  but  lay  afide  Preju- 
dices :  For  you  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  caft  your  Eye  upon 
the  Prophecies  contain'd  in  the  Sacred  Pages ;  which  beyond 
all  difpute  were  Written  before  they  came  to  pafs.  This 
Sacred  Hiftory  is  confirm'd  by  Heathen  Authors,  and  by  the 
Monuments  of  greateft  Antiquity,  and  thofe  the  moft  uncon- 
tefted  that  paft  Ages  can  afford.  Believe  me,  if  thou  wouldft 
but  reflect  upon  the  manner  in  which  the  Religion  of  Jefus 
Chr'ifi  was  Eftablifh'd  in  the  World,  and  the  Change  that  it 
wrought ;  if  thou  hadft  but  a  juft  view  of  the  [95]  Characters 
of  Truth,  Sincerity  and  Divinity  that  fhine  in  the  Scriptures: 
In  a  word,  if  thou  didft  but  enter  into  the  particulars  of  our 
Religion ;  thou  wouldft  fee  and  be  fenfible,  that  its  Doclrines 
and  Precepts,  its  Promifes  and  Threats,  are  not  chargeable 
with  any  abfurdity ;  nor  with  any  ill  defign,  or  any  thing  that 
runs  contrary  to  our  natural  Sentiments :  And  that  nothing 
is  more  fuitable  to  right  Reafon,  and  the  Principles  of  Con- 
fcience.  \ 

Adario.  This  is  the  fame  Stuff  that  the  Jefuits  have  had  up 
above  a  hundred  times.  They  will  have  it,  that  fome  five  or 
fix  thoufand  years  ago,  all  that  is  fince  come  to  pafs,  was  then 
unchangeably  decreed.  They  lay  down  the  way  in  which  the 
Heavens  and  the  Earth  were  Created  ;  and  tell  you,  that  Man 
was  made  of  the  Duft  of  the  Earth,  and  the  Woman  out  of 
one  of  his  Ribs,  as  if  God  had  not  made  her  of  the  fame 
Stuff ;  that  a  Serpent  tempted  this  Man  in  a  Garden  of  Fruit- 
Trees  to  eat  of  an  Apple,  which  was  the  occafion  that  the 
Great  Spirit  put  his  own  Son  to  Death,  on  purpofe  to  fave 


to  iVtfr^-America.  523 

all  men.  If  I  mould  fay  that  thefe  advances  have  a  greater 
appearance  of  fabuloufnefs  than  of  truth,  you  would  clofe 
upon  me  with  Reafons  fetch'd  from  your  Bible  :  But  accord- 
ing to  your  own  words,  this  Scripture  of  yours  had  not  always 
a  Being ;  the  invention  of  it  bears  the  date  of  fome  three 
thoufand  years  ago  ;  and  'twas  not  Printed  till  within  thefe 
four  or  five  Centuries.  Now,  confidering  the  divers  events 
that  come  round  in  the  courfe  of  feveral  Ages,  one  muft 
certainly  be  very  credulous  in  giving  credit  to  fo  many  idle 
Stories  as  are  huddled  up  in  that  great  Book  that  the  Chrif- 
tians  would  have  us  to  believe.  I  have  feen  fome  of  the  Books 
that  the  Jefuits  Writ  of  our  Country ;  and  thofe  who  knew 
how  to  read  [96]  'em,  explain'd  to  me  the  fenfe  of  'em  in  the 
Language  that  I  fpeak  ;  but  I  found  they  contain'd  an  infinity 
of  Lyes  and  Fidlions  heap'd  up  one  above  another.  Now,  if 
we  fee  with  our  eyes  that  Lyes  are  in  Print,  and  that  things 
are  not  reprefented  in  Paper  as  they  really  are ;  how  can  you 
prefs  me  to  believe  the  Sincerity  of  your  Bible  that  was  Writ 
fo  many  Ages  ago,  and  Tranflated  out  of  feveral  Languages 
by  ignorant  Men  that  could  not  reach  the  juft  Senfe,  or  by 
Lyars  who  have  alter'd,  interpolated,  or  pared  the  Words 
you  now  read.  I  could  mention  feveral  other  Objections, 
which  in  the  end  will  perhaps  influence  thee  in  fome  meafure, 
to  own  that  I  have  fome  reafon  to  confine  my  Belief  to  fuch 
things  as  are  vifible  and  probable. 

Lahontan.  Poor  Adario,  I  have  laid  before  thee,  the  cer- 
tainty and  evidence  of  the  Chriftian  Religion ;  but  inftead  of 
being  convinc'd,  thou  look'ft  upon  my  Proofs  as  Chimerical, 


524  Some  New  Voyages 

and  offered  the  moft  foolifh  Reafons  in  the  World.  You  quote 
the  Falfhoods  Written  in  the  Accounts  of  your  Country  that 
you  have  feen ;  as  if  the  Jefuits  who  Writ  'em  could  not  have 
been  impos'd  upon  by  thofe  who  fupplied  them  with  fuch 
Memoirs.1  You  muft  confider,  that  thefe  Defcriptions  of 
Canada  are  Bawbles  that  cannot  come  into  the  Ballance  with 
the  Books  that  treat  of  Sacred  things ;  fuch  things  as  a  hun- 
dred different  Authours  have  Writ  of,  without  contradicting 
one  another. 

Adario.  How  do  you  mean,  without  contradicting  one  an- 
other? Why!  That  Book  of  Holy  Things,  is  not  it  full  of 
Contradictions?  Thefe  Gofpels  that  the  Jefuits  fpeak  of,  do 
not  they  occafion  difcord  between  the  French  and  the  Englifli  ? 
And  yet  if  we  take  your  word  for  it,  every  Period  of  that 
Book  fprung  from  the  Mouth  [97]  of  the  Great  Spirit.  But 
if  the  Great  Spirit  mean'd  that  his  Words  mould  be  under- 
ftood,  why  did  he  talk  fo  confufedly,  and  cloath  his  Words 
with  an  ambiguous  Senfe?  One  or  two  things  muft  follow 
from  this  advance.  If  he  was  born  and  died  upon  the  Earth, 
and  made  fpeeches  here,  why,  then  his  difcourfes  muft  be  loft; 
for  he  would  certainly  have  fpoke  fo  diftin&ly  and  plainly, 
that  the  very  Children  might  conceive  his  meaning.  Or,  if 
you  will  have  the  Gofpels  to  be  his  genuine  Words,  and 
contain  nothing  but  what  flow'd  from  him ;  why,  then  he  muft 
have  come  to  raife  Wars  in  the  World  inftead  of  Peace  ;  which 
cannot  be.  The  Englifli  have  told  me  that  tho'  their  Gofpels 
contain  the  fame  Words  with  the  French,  yet  there's  as  great 


1  Upon  the  early  Jesuit  histories  of  Canada,  see  p.  412,  note  1,  ante.  — Ed. 


J  avctoet  eomefrom  rhe  ftci'e  Cc 
t&rvt      tneirtfe/i'ci    into   ~u   lake 


Auti.  Cruinq.  tec.  Q.   ~f£ 


-l(,'~_C'       I      J  lie  rtlations  at  tlitOick        jfe^'  ,      ialn^    "- 


7^4.-   relatione  of  y  t/ecec^ct     ^V  **>«*_ 


4.tnonfttviu  trout  Jor  r/u    entertain- 
Vi — ^, 


-mtixt  of  the  JPnuntuui  citnJ  hi 
Company 


"-'■■i'       ~-»~ 


P*^' 


.7/i*  interment  of 


^   I44I     4LW 

7^<-  burying  puiec  fai 
AJfui/ciyts 


71it  i\-/.-ir:.-iu  of  u  .iececu'cl 
dancing 


to  iVflr^-America.  525 

a  difference  between  their  Religion  and  yours,  as  between 
Night  and  Day.  They  fay  pofitively  that  their's  is  the  beft  ; 
and  on  the  other  hand,  the  Jefuits  allege,  that  the  Religion  of 
the  EngliJJi,  and  of  a  thoufand  Nations  befides,  is  good  for 
nothing.  If  there  be  but  one  true  Religion  upon  Earth,  who 
muft  I  believe  in  this  cafe  ?  Who  is  it  that  do's  not  take  their 
own  Religion  to  be  the  moft  perfect.?  How  can  the  Capacity 
of  Man  be  able  to  fingle  out  that  Divine  Religion  from 
amongft  fo  many  more,  that  lay  claim  to  the  fame  Title  ? 
Believe  me,  my  dear  Brother,  the  Great  Spirit  is  Wife,  all  his 
Works  are  perfect ;  'tis  he  that  made  us,  and  he  knows  per- 
fectly well  what  will  become  of  us.  'Tis  our  part  to  act  freely, 
without  perplexing  our  thoughts  about  future  things.  He 
order'd  thee  to  be  Born  in  France,  with  intent  that  thou 
fhouldeft  believe  what  thou  neither  feeft  nor  conceiveft ;  and 
me  he  has  caus'd  to  be  Born  a  Huron,  to  the  end  that  I  mould 
give  credit  to  nothing  but  what  I  underftand,  and  what  my 
reafon  teaches  me. 

[98]  Lahontan.  Reafon  teaches  thee  to  be  a  Chriftian,  and 
yet  you  refufe  to  be  fuch.  If  you  would,  you  might  under- 
ftand the  Truths  of  our  Gofpel,  in  which  all  things  are  of  a 
piece,  and  nothing  can  be  found  that  favours  of  Contradiction. 
The  EngHJh  are  Chriftians  as  well  as  the  French  ;  and  tho'  thefe 
two  Nations  have  fome  difference  upon  the  fcore  of  Religion, 
it  only  relates  to  fome  Paffages  of  Scripture,  that  they  under- 
ftand different  ways.  The  firft  and  principal  point  that  occa- 
fions  fo  many  difputes,  is  this.  The  French  believe  that  fince 
the  Son  of  God  faid,  that  his  Body  was  in  a  morfel  of  Bread  ; 


526  Some  New  Voyages 

we  are  bound  to  take  it  for  a  truth,  in  regard  that  he  could 
not  lie.  He  told  his  Apoftles  that  the  Bread  was  truly  his 
Body,  and  that  they  ought  to  eat  it,  and  to  perpetuate  that 
Ceremony  in  Commemoration  of  him.  Accordingly  this  Pre- 
cept is  obferv'd ;  for  fince  the  death  of  that  God  made  Man, 
the  Sacrifice  of  the  Mafs  is  perform'd  every  day  among  the 
French,  who  make  no  doubt  of  the  real  prefence  of  the  Son  of 
God  in  that  bit  of  Bread.  But  the  Englijh  pretend,  that  the 
Son  of  God  being  in  Heaven,  cannot  be  Corporally  prefent 
upon  Earth,  and  that  his  words  infuing  upon  that  Inftitution 
(the  repetition  of  which  would  be  tedious  to  thee)  are  evi- 
dence that  he  is  only  Spiritually  prefent  in  the  Bread.  This 
is  all  the  difference  between  them  and  us ;  for  as  to  the  other 
Points,  they  are  fo  trifling,  that  we  could  eafily  come  to  an 
accommodation  upon  'em. 

Adario.  I  perceive  then,  the  words  of  the  Son  of  the 
Great  Spirit  are  chargeable  with  felf-contradiclion  or  obfcu- 
rity;  for  as  much  as  you  and  the  Englijh  difpute  about  his 
meaning  with  fo  much  heat  and  arpmofity :  And  this  feems  to 
be  the  principal  Spring  of  the  hatred  that  thefe  two  [99] 
Nations  bear  to  one  another.  But  that  is  not  what  I  infift 
upon.  Doft  thou  hear,  my  Brother;  both  the  one  and  the 
other  muft  needs  be  fools,  in  believing  the  Incarnation  of  a 
God;  confidering  the  ambiguity  of  thofe  Difcourfes  mention'd 
in  your  Gofpel.  There  you  meet  with  an  infinity  of  things 
which  are  too  grofs  to  come  from  the  Mouth  of  fo  perfect  a 
Being.  The  Jefuits  affure  us,  that  the  Son  of  the  Great  Spirit 
declar'd  that   he  fmcerely  defired  the  Salvation  of  all  Men. 


to  North- America.  527 

Now,  if  he  defires  it,  doubtlefs  it  muft  come  to  pafs;  and  yet 
they  are  not  all  Sav'd  neither,  for  as  much  as  he  has  faid ; 
many  are  calVd,  but  few  are  cbofen.  This  I  take  to  be  a  plain 
Contradiction.  The  Fathers  reply,  that  God  does  defire  the 
Salvation  of  men,  but  upon  the  condition  that  they  defire  it 
themfelves.  But  after  all,  we  do  not  find  that  God  has  added 
that  Claufe,  for  if  he  had,  he  had  not  fpoke  fo  pofitively.  But 
the  Myftery  lies  here.  The  Jefuits  have  a  mind  to  pry  into 
the  Secrets  of  the  Almighty,  and  to  affume  what  himfelf  did 
not  pretend  to,  for  he  mention'd  no  fuch  condition.  The  cafe 
is  the  fame,  as  if  the  great  Captain  General  of  the  French 
fhould  give  notice  by  his  Viceroy,  that  'tis  his  pleafure  that 
all  the  Slaves  of  Canada  fhould  be  Tranfported  to  France, 
where  they  might  all  grow  rich ;  and  thereupon  the  Slaves 
fhould  make  anfwer  that  they  will  not  go,  becaufe  that  great 
Captain  cannot  defire  it  unlefs  they  be  of  the  fame  mind 
themfelves.  Is  not  it  true,  my  Brother,  that  their  anfwer 
would  be  ridicul'd,  and  they  would  be  forc'd  to  go  to  France 
againft  their  will?  Can  you  offer  anything  to  the  contrary? 
In  a  word,  the  Jefuits  have  commented  to  me  upon  fo  many 
Expreflions  in  that  Book  that  contradict  one  another,  that 
I'm  amaz'd  to  find  that  they  ftill  call  it  the  [100]  Holy  Scrip- 
tures. 'Tis  written  there,  that  the  firft  man  whom  the  Great 
Spirit  made  with  his  own  Hands,  did  eat  of  a  forbidden  Fruit, 
for  which  both  he  and  his  Wife  were  punifh'd,  as  being  equally 
Criminal.  Now,  let's  fuppofe  the  Punifhment  inflicted  upon 
the  account  of  the  Apple  to  be  what  you  will;  this  poor 
Man  had  nothing  to  complain  of,  but  that  the  Great  Spirit 


528  Some  New  Voyages 

knowing  that  he  would  eat  of  it,  fhould  have  Created  him  to 
be  Miferable.  But  let's  confider  the  cafe  of  his  Pofterity,  who 
according  to  the  Jefuits  are  involv'd  in  his  Overthrow :  Are 
the  Children  Blame-worthy  for  the  Gluttony  of  their  Father 
and  their  Mother?  If  a  man  Murder'd  one  of  our  Kings, 
rauft  the  Punifhment  reach  to  his  whole  Generation ;  to 
Fathers,  Mothers,  Uncles,  Coufins,  Sifters,  Brothers,  and 
all  his  other  Relations?  Shall  we  fuppofe,  therefore,  that 
when  the  Great  Spirit  gave  this  Man  a  Being,  he  knew  not 
what  he  might  do  after  his  Creation?  But  that  cannot  be. 
But  let's  fuppofe  again  that  all  his  Pofterity  were  accomplices 
of  the  Crime,  (which  at  the  fame  time  is  an  unjuft  fuppofition) 
do's  not  your  Scripture  make  this  Great  Spirit  to  be  a  Being 
of  fuch  Mercy  and  Clemency,  that  his  Loving-Kindnefs  to 
the  Human  Race  leaves  all  Conception  far  behind  it?  Is  not 
he  fo  great  and  fo  puiffant,  that  if  all  the  Spirits  of  men  that 
either  are,  or  have  been,  or  are  to  come,  were  united  in  one 
Perfon,  'twould  be  impoflible  for  that  Mighty  one  to  com- 
prehend the  leaft  tittle  of  his  Omnipotence?  Now,  fince  his 
goodnefs  and  mercy  are  fo  tranfcendent,  can't  he  by  one 
Word  vouchfafe  a  Pardon  to  that  man  and  all  his  defen- 
dants ?  And  fince  he  is  fo  powerful  and  great,  how  improb- 
able is  it,  that  fuch  an  Incomprehenfible  Being  fhould  turn 
himfelf  into  a  Man,  and  not  only  live  a  miferable  Life,  [101] 
but  die  an  infamous  Death ;  in  order  to  expiate  the  Sin  of 
fo  mean  a  Creature,  that  is  as  much  or  more  beneath  him,  as 
a  Flie  is  beneath  the  Sun  and  the  Stars  ?  Where  would  that 
infinite  Power  be  then?     What  ufe  would  it  be  of  to  him, 


to  North- America.  529 

and  what  advantage  would  he  make  of  it  ?  To  my  mind,  to 
believe  the  debating  of  the  Divine  Nature,  fpeaks  a  doubt 
of  the  Incomprehenfible  reach  of  his  Omnipotence,  and  an 
extravagant  Prefumption  with  refpect  to  our  felves. 

Lahontan.  Do'ft  not  thou  perceive,  my  dear  Adario,  that 
the  Great  Spirit  being  fo  powerful,  and  intitled  to  the  Per- 
fections you  have  nam'd,  the  Sin  of  our  Primitive  Father  muft 
by  confequence  be  the  moft  enormous  and  heinous  Crime  that 
imagination  it  felf  can  reach?  To  make  the  cafe  plain  by  an 
example ;  If  I  beat  one  of  my  Soldiers,  there's  no  harm  done, 
but  if  I  offer'd  an  affront  to  the  King,  my  Crime  would  be 
inflam'd  to  the  laft  degree,  and  be  juftly  accounted  unpardon- 
able. Now,  Adam  having  offer'd  a  piece  of  Indignity  to  the 
King  of  Kings,  we  come  into  the  lift  of  his  Accomplices,  as 
being  part  of  his  Soul ;  and  confequently  the  Divine  Juftice 
requires  fuch  a  Satisfaction  as  the  Death  of  his  Son.  'Tis 
true,  God  could  have  Pardon'd  us  with  one  Word ;  but  for 
reafons  that  I  cannot  give  you  eafily  to  underftand,  he  was 
gracioufly  pleas'd  to  live  and  to  die  for  all  Mankind.  I  own 
that  he  is  merciful,  and  that  he  might  have  acquitted  Adam 
the  fame  day  that  the  Crime  was  committed  ;  for  his  Mercy 
is  the  ground  of  all  the  hopes  we  have  of  Salvation :  But  if  he 
had  not  refented  Adam's  Difobedience,  his  Prohibition  had 
been  a  jeft.  Had  he  overlook'd  it,  the  confequence  would 
have  been  that  he  did  not  fpeak  ferioufly ;  and  upon  that 
foot,  all  the  World  would  have  had  a  juft  Plea  for  doing  what 
they  pleas'd. 

[102]  Adarlo.     Hitherto  thou   proveft  nothing;   and  the 
34 


53o  Some  New  Voyages 

more  I  fift  the  pretended  Incarnation,  I  find  it  the  lefs  prob- 
able. What !  To  think  that  this  Great  and  Incomprehenfible 
Being,  the  Creator  of  the  Earth,  of  the  Seas,  and  of  this  vaft 
Firmament,  mould  be  capable  of  debating  himfelf  fo  far,  as 
to  lye  nine  Months  Prifoner  in  the  Bowels  of  a  Woman,  and 
expofe  himfelf  to  the  miferable  Life  of  his  Fellow  Sinners, 
that  Writ  the  Books  of  your  Gofpel;  to  be  Beaten,  Whip'd, 
and  Crucify'd  like  an  unhappy  Wretch ;  this,  I  fay,  is  what 
can't  enter  into  my  thoughts.  Tis  written,  that  he  came 
upon  the  Earth  on  purpofe  to  die  there,  and  with  the  fame 
Breath  'tis  faid  that  he  was  afraid  to  die.  This  implies  a 
Contradiction  two  ways.  In  the  firft  place,  if  his  defign  was 
to  be  Born,  in  order  to  die,  he  ought  not  to  have  dreaded 
death ;  for,  what  is  the  ground  of  the  fear  of  death  ?  The 
dread  of  death  proceeds  from  this,  that  one  do's  not  know 
what  will  become  of  'em  when  they  depart  this  Life.  But  he 
was  not  unacquainted  with  the  place  he  was  bound  for,  fo 
that  he  had  no  reafon  to  be  afraid.  You  know  very  well  that 
we  and  our  Wives  Poyfon  our  felves  frequently,  in  order  to 
keep  one  another  Company  in  the  Regions  of  the  dead,  when 
one  or  t'other  is  fnatch'd  away.1  So  you  fee  plainly  the  lofs 
of  Life  does  not  fcare  us,  tho'  at  the  fame  time,  we  are  not 
certain  what  courfe  our  Souls  will  fteer.  What  anfwer  canft 
thee  give  me  upon  this  Head  ?  In  a  fecond  place  ;  Since  the 
Son  of  the  Great  Spirit  was  inverted  with  a  Power  equal  to 
that  of  his  Father ;  he  had  no  occafion  to  pray  his  Father  to 


1  Suicide  by  poisoning  was  not  infrequent  among  Indians,  although  not  deemed 
commendable.     See  Jes.  Rel.,  index,  caption  Suicide.  —  Ed. 


to  iVor^-America.  531 

fave  his  Life,  in  regard  that  he  was  able  to  guard  off  Death 
by  his  own  Power ;  and  that  in  praying  to  his  Father  he  pray'd 
to  himfelf.  As  for  my  part,  my  dear  Brother,  I  can't  have  any 
notion  [103]  of  what  thou  wouldeft  have  me  to  Conceive. 

Lahontan.  I  find  you  were  in  the  right  of  it  in  telling  me 
but  now,  that  your  capacity  would  not  reach  an  inch  above 
the  furface  of  the  Earth.  Your  way  of  Reafoning  is  fufHcient 
Proof  of  your  Affertion.  Now  that  I  have  heard  this,  I  do 
not  think  it  ftrange  that  the  Jefuits  have  fo  much  trouble  in 
Preaching  to  you,  and  giving  you  to  underftand  the  Sacred 
Truths.  I  play  the  fool  in  reafoning  with  a  Savage,  that  is 
not  capable  of  diftinguifhing  a  Chimerical  Suppofition  from 
a  certain  and  a  {landing  Principle,  or  a  Confequence  well 
drawn  from  a  falfe  Inference.  To  give  you  an  inftance. 
When  you  fpake  of  this  truth,  that  God  was  willing  to  fave 
all  men,  and  at  the  fame  time  that  they  are  but  few  who  are 
fav'd ;  you  charg'd  a  Contradi&ion  upon  it,  and  at  the  fame 
time  there's  no  fuch  thing  in  the  cafe :  For  he  defires  to  fave 
all  men  that  wifh  their  own  Salvation,  by  obferving  his  Law 
and  his  Precepts  ;  that  is,  fuch  as  believe  his  Incarnation,  the 
truth  of  the  Gofpels,  the  rewards  provided  for  the  Good,  the 
punifhments  prepared  for  the  Wicked,  and  a  State  of  Futurity. 
But  in  regard  that  few  fuch  will  be  found,  all  the  reft  are 
doom'd  to  the  everlafting  Flames  of  that  Fire  that  you  make 
a  jeft  of.  Take  care  you  are  not  one  of  the  latter  Clafs.  If 
it  mould  happen  fo,  'twould  be  a  great  trouble  to  me,  became 
thou  art  my  Friend.  You  will  not  fay  then,  that  the  Gofpel 
is  cramm'd  with  Contradictions  and  Chimaera's  ;  you  will  not 


532  Some  New  Voyages 

then  require  grofs  Proofs  for  all  the  Truths  I  have  laid  before 
you ;  you'll  repent  in  earneft  of  having  branded  our  Evan- 
gelifts  for  weak  and  filly  Tale-tellers.  But,  the  worft  is,  'twill 
then  be  too  late.  Prithee,  think  of  all  this,  and  be  not  fo  very 
obftinate;  [104]  for,  in  earneft,  if  thou  doft  not  yield  to  the 
unconteftable  Reafons  that  I  produce  for  our  Myfteries,  I  will 
never  fpeak  to  thee  as  long  as  I  live. 

Adarlo.  Ha !  my  Brother,  do  not  trouble  thy  head,  I  do 
not  pretend  to  provoke  thee  by  offering  my  Reafons.  I  do 
not  hinder  thee  to  believe  the  Gofpels :  I  only  beg  the  favour 
that  thou'lt  fuffer  me  to  doubt  the  truth  of  all  the  Advances 
thou  haft  made.  Nothing  can  be  more  natural  to  the  Chrift- 
ians  than  to  believe  the  Holy  Scriptures,  upon  the  account, 
that  from  their  Infancy  they  have  heard  fo  much  of  'em,  that 
in  imitation  of  fo  many  People  Educated  in  the  fame  Faith, 
they  have  'em  fo  much  Imprinted  upon  their  Imagination, 
that  Reafon  has  no  farther  influence  upon  their  Minds,  they 
being  already  prepoffefs'd  with  a  firm  belief  of  the  truth  of 
the  Gofpels.  To  People  that  are  void  of  Prejudice,  fuch  as 
the  Hiirvns,  there's  nothing  fo  reafonable,  as  to  examine  things 
narrowly.  Now,  after  frequent  reflexions  for  the  courfe  of 
ten  years  upon  what  the  Jefuits  Preach'd  of  the  Life  and 
Death  of  the  Son  of  the  Great  Spirit,  I  muft  tell  you,  that  all 
my  Hurons  will  give  thee  fourty  reafons  to  the  contrary.  As 
for  my  own  part,  I  have  always  maintain'd  that  if  'twere  pofii- 
ble  that  the  Great  Spirit  had  been  fo  mean,  as  to  defcend  to 
the  Earth,  he  had  (hewn  himfelf  to  all  the  Inhabitants  of  the 
Earth ;  he  had  defcended  in  Triumph,  and  in  publick  view, 


to  North- America.  533 

with  Splendour  and  Majefty ;  he  had  rais'd  the  dead,  reftor'd 
fight  to  the  blind,  made  the  lame  to  walk  upright,  cur'd  all 
the  difeafes  upon  the  Earth  :  In  fine,  he  had  fpoke  and  com- 
manded all  that  he  had  a  mind  to  have  done,  he  had  gone 
from  Nation  to  Nation  to  work  thefe  great  Miracles,  and  to 
give  the  fame  Laws  to  the  whole  World.  Had  he  done  fo, 
we  had  been  all  of  the  fame  [105]  Religion,  and  that  great 
Uniformity  fpread  over  the  face  of  the  Earth,  would  be  a 
lafting  Proof  to  our  Pofterity  for  ten  thoufand  years  to  come, 
of  the  truth  of  a  Religion  that  was  known  and  receiv'd  with 
equal  approbation  in  the  four  Corners  of  the  Earth.  But 
inftead  of  that  Uniformity,  we  find  five  or  fix  hundred  Reli- 
gions, among  which  that  Profefs'd  by  the  French,  is  according 
to  your  Argument  the  only  true  one,  the  only  one  that  is 
Good  and  Holy.  In  fine,  after  I  had  reflected  a  thoufand 
times  upon  thofe  Riddles  that  you  call  Myfteries,  I  was  of  the 
Opinion  that  a  Man  muft  be  Born  beyond  the  great  Lake1; 
that  is,  he  muft  be  an  Englijh-man  or  a  French-man,  that  can 
form  any  Idea  of  'em.  For  when  they  allege  that  God,  who 
can't  be  reprefented  under  any  Figure  ;  could  produce  a  Son 
under  the  Figure  of  a  Man :  I  am  ready  to  reply,  that  a  Wo- 
man can't  bring  forth  a  Beaver;  by  reafon  that  in  the  courfe 
of  Nature,  every  Species  produces  its  like.  Befides,  if  before 
the  coming  of  the  Son  of  God  all  men  were  devoted  to  the 
Devil,  what  reafon  have  we  to  think  that  he  would  affume  the 
Form  of  fuch  Creatures  as  were  lifted  into  the  Service  of  the 


1  "  Beyond  the  Great  Lake  "  was  a  common  rendition  of  the  Indian  term  for  the 
land  across  the  ocean.  —  Ed. 


534  Some  New  Voyages 

Devil.  Could  not  he  take  upon  him  another  Form,  which 
might  be  finer  and  more  pompous  than  the  Humane  ?  That 
he  might,  is  the  more  reafonable,  fince  the  third  Perfon  of 
that  Trinity  (which  is  fo  inconfiftent  with  Unity)  affum'd  the 
Form  of  a  Dove. 

Lahontan.  Thou  haft  drawn  up  a  Savage  fort  of  a  Syftem 
by  inventing  Chimasra's  that  are  nothing  to  the  purpofe. 
Give  me  leave  to  tell  thee  once  more,  that  I  fee  'tis  in  vain 
for  me  to  attempt  to  convince  thee  by  folid  Reafons,  in  regard 
that  thou  art  not  capable  of  underftanding  'em.  I  muft  there- 
fore refer  you  to  the  Jefuits.  [106]  In  the  mean  time,  I  have 
a  mind  to  give  you  to  underftand  one  thing  that's  very  plain, 
and  that  will  fall  within  the  Verge  of  your  Genius,  viz.  That 
'tis  not  the  bare  believing  of  the  Great  Truths  of  the  Gofpel 
which  you  deny,  that  is  fufficient  to  conduct  one  to  the  Man- 
fions  of  the  Great  Spirit.  Over  and  above  the  belief,  one 
muft  inviolably  obferve  the  Precepts  of  the  Law  that  is  there 
deliver'd ;  that  is  to  fay,  one  muft  not  adore  any  thing  but 
the  Great  Spirit  alone,  one  muft  not  work  on  the  days  allotted 
for  folemn  Prayer,  one  muft  honour  their  Father  and  their 
Mother,  and  not  only  avoid  the  embraces  of  Girles,  but  be 
free  from  an  inclination  that  way,  unlefs  it  be  upon  the  foot 
of  Marriage.  'Tis  requir'd  for  this  end,  that  we  fhould  not 
kill  or  promote  the  killing  of  any  one ;  that  we  fhould  not 
fpeak  ill  of  our  Brethren,  or  utter  Lies,  or  touch  another 
man's  Wife,  or  incroach  upon  the  property  of  our  Brethren. 
We  muft  go  to  Mafs  on  the  days  appointed  for  that  purpofe 
by  the  Jefuits,  and  Faft  fome   days  of  the  week.     For  tho' 


to  North- America.  535 

you  believ'd  the  Holy  Scriptures  as  much  as  we  do,  unlefs 
you  obferve  the  Precepts  they  contain,  you'll  be  doom'd  to 
everlafting  Flames  after  your  death. 

Adario.  So,  my  dear  Brother,  this  is  what  I  expected. 
Tis  a  long  time  fince  I  knew  all  that  thou  haft  now  fet  forth ; 
and  indeed  I  take  it  to  be  a  very  reafonable  Article  in  your 
Gofpel.  Nothing  can  be  jufter  and  more  plaufible  than  thofe 
Precepts  you  fpeak  of.  You  act  difingenuoufly  in  faying  that 
unlefs  the  Commandments  are  punctually  obferv'd  and  prac- 
tis'd,  the  giving  Faith  and  Credit  to  the  Gofpel  will  not  avail : 
For,  pray,  how  comes  it  about  that  the  French  believe  the 
Gofpel,  and  yet  make  a  jeft  of  its  Precepts.  This  I  take  to 
be  a  manifeft  Contradiction:  [107]  For,  in  the  firft  place,  as 
to  the  Adoration  of  the  Great  Spirit,  I  fee  no  fign  of  it  in 
your  Actions,  fo  that  your  Worfhip  confifts  only  in  Words, 
and  feems  to  be  Calculated  to  cheat  us.  To  give  you  an  in- 
ftance ;  do  not  you  fee  every  day  that  your  Merchants  when 
they  bargain  with  us  for  Beaver-Skins,  do  commonly  fay,  my 
Goods  coft  me  fo  much,  'tis  true  as  I  Adore  the  Almighty;  I 
lofe  fo  much  by  you,  'tis  as  true  as  that  God  is  in  Heaven. 
But  I  do  not  find  that  they  offer  him  the  Sacrifice  of  their 
moft  valuable  Goods,  as  we  do  after  we  have  bought  'em 
from  them,  when  we  burn  'em  before  their  Faces.  In  the 
next  place,  as  for  Working  on  the  days  fet  apart  for  Worfhip, 
I  do  not  find  that  you  make  any  difference  between  Holy- 
Days  and  Work-Days ;  for  I  have  frequently  feen  the  French 
bargain  for  Skins  on  your  Holy-Days,  as  well  as  make  Nets, 
Game,  Quarrel,  beat  one  another,  get  Drunk,  and  commit  a 


536  Some  New  Voyages 

hundred  extravagant  Actions.     In  a  third  place,  touching  the 
Veneration  we  have  for  our  Fathers  or  Anceftours,  'tis  but 
feldom  that  you  follow  their  Counfel ;  you  fuffer  'em  to  die 
for  Hunger,  you  leave  'em  and  take  up  feparate  Habitations ; 
you  are  always  ready  to  ask  fomething  of  'em,  but  never  to 
give  'em  any  thing  ;  and  if  you  expert  any  thing  from  'em, 
you  wifh  for  their  death ;  or  at  leaft  you  expert  it  with  impa- 
tience.    In  the  fourth  place,  as  for  Continence  with  refpecl:  to 
the  tender  Sex  ;  who  is  it  among  you  (abating  for  the  Jefuits) 
that  has  ever  acted  up  to  it ;    do  not  we  fee  every  day  that 
your  Youths  purfue  our  Daughters  and  our  Wives,  even  to 
the  very  Fields,  with  a  defign  to  inveigle  'em  by  prefents  ? 
Do  not  they  Roll  every  Night   from  Hutt  to  Hutt  in  our 
Village,  in  order  to  debauch  'em?     And  doft  not  thee  know 
how  many  fuch  Adventures  [108]  there  are  among  thy  own 
Soldiers  ?     In  the  fifth  place,  to  touch  upon  the  head  of  Mur- 
der;   'tis  fuch  a  common  thing   among  you,  that  upon  the 
leaft   accident,   you  clap  your   Hands   to   your  Swords    and 
Butcher  one  another.     I  remember  when  I  was  at  Paris,  Peo- 
ple were  run  thro'  in  the  Streets  every  night ;   and  upon  the 
Road  between  Paris  and  Rochel,  I  was  told  that  I  was  in  danger 
of  my  life.     Sixthly.     Lying  and  Slandering  your  Brethren,  is 
a  thing  that  you  can  as  little  refrain  as  Eating  and  Drinking. 
I  never  heard  four  French-Men  Converfe  together,  without 
fpeaking  ill  of  fome  body ;  and  if  you  knew  what  I  have  heard 
'em  fay  publickly  of  the  Viceroy,  the  Intendant,  the  Jefuits, 
and  of  a  thoufand  People  that  you  know,  not  excepting  your 
Self,  you  would   be  convinc'd  that  the  French  are  very  well 


to  North- America.  537 

vers'd  in  Defamations.  And  as  to  the  bufinefs  of  Lying,  I 
affirm  it  for  a  truth,  that  there  is  not  one  Merchant  in  this 
Country  that  will  not  tell  you  twenty  Lies  in  felling  the  worth 
of  a  Beaver's  Skin  in  Goods ;  not  to  mention  the  lies  they 
invent  in  order  to  defame  their  Neighbours.  In  a  feventh 
place,  to  adjuft  the  Point  of  ingaging  with  Married  Women, 
we  need  no  other  Proof  than  to  hear  your  Difcourfes  when 
you  have  got  a  little  Drink  in  your  Heads ;  then  you'll  enter- 
tain us  with  a  great  many  fine  Stories  of  your  Adventures  that 
way.  But  to  go  no  farther,  pray  reckon  up  how  many  Chil- 
dren are  got  upon  the  Wives  of  the  Coureurs  de  Bois  during 
their  Husbands  abfence.  In  the  eighth  place,  to  come  to  the 
Article  of  not  encroaching  upon  our  Neighbours  Property, 
how  many  Thefts  or  Robberies  have  you  feen  committed 
among  the  Coureurs  de  Bois  fince  you  came  to  this  Country? 
Have  not  the  Thieves  been  taken  in  the  Fact,  and  punifh'd 
accordingly?  Is  not  it  fuch  a  common  [109]  thing  in  your 
Towns,  that  one  can't  walk  in  the  Streets  in  the  Night  time 
with  fafety,  and  that  you  dare  not  leave  your  Doors  open? 
In  the  ninth  place,  as  for  going  to  your  Mafs  to  hear  fome 
Words  fpoke  in  an  unknown  Language ;  'tis  true  the  French 
go  commonly  to  it,  but  their  defign  in  going  is  to  think  of 
other  things  than  Praying.  At  Quebec,  the  Men  go  to  Mafs 
to  pick  up  the  Women,  and  the  Women  take  the  fame  Method 
to  make  Alignments  with  the  Men.  I  have  feen  fome  of 
your  Women  call  for  Cufhions,  for  fear  of  fpoiling  their 
Stockins  and  Petti-coats ;  then  they  fit  down  upon  their 
Heels,  and  pull  a  Book  out  of  a  great  Bag,  which  they  open 


538  Some  New  Voyages 

and  hold  in  their  hands,  tho'  at  the  fame  time,  they  look  more 
at  the  Men  they  like,  than  at  the  Prayers  contain'd  in  the 
Book.  Moil  of  your  French  People  take  Snuff  when  they're 
at  Mafs ;  they  talk,  and  laugh ;  and  fing  rather  for  Diverfion 
than  out  of  Devotion.  And,  which  is  yet  worfe;  I  know  that 
during  the  time  of  Mafs,  feveral  Women  and  Girles  take  the 
opportunity  of  purfuing  their  Amours,  by  flaying  at  home  all 
alone.  As  for  your  Fails,  I  mufl  fay  they  are  very  comical : 
You  eat  of  all  forts  of  Fifh  till  you  burfl  again,  you  cram  down 
Eggs  and  a  thoufand  other  things,  and  yet  you  call  this  fail- 
ing. In  fine,  my  dear  Brother,  you  French  Folks  do  all  of 
you  make  large  Pretenfions  to  Faith,  and  yet  you  are  down- 
right Infidels  ;  you  would  fain  pafs  for  wife  People,  and  at  the 
fame  time  you  are  fools ;  you  take  your  felves  to  be  Men  of 
Senfe,  but  at  the  bottom  Ignorance  and  Prefumption  is  your 
true  Character. 

Lahontan.  This  conclufion,  my  dear  Brother,  favours  too 
ilrong  of  the  Hurons,  in  being  apply'd  to  all  the  French  in 
general.  If  your  reprefentation  were  jufl,  ne're  a  one  of  'em 
would  go  to  [no]  Paradife.  But  we  know  that  there  are 
Millions  of  'em  in  the  State  of  the  Bleffed,  whom  we  call 
Saints,  and  whofe  Images  you  fee  in  our  Churches.  I  own 
that  there  are  but  few  of  the  French  who  have  that  true  Faith 
that's  the  only  Principle  of  Piety ;  feveral  make  a  Profeflion 
of  believing  the  Truths  of  our  Religion,  but  this  belief  is 
wanting  as  to  its  due  flrength  and  livelinefs.  I  own  that  the 
greateil  part  of  thofe  who  know  the  Divine  Truths,  and  make 
a  Profeflion  of  believing  them,  do  act  quite  contrary  to  what 


to  iVor^-America.  539 

Faith  and  Religion  injoyns.  I  cannot  deny  the  juftnefs  of 
your  Charge,  in  alleging  a  Contradiction  upon  'em.  But 
you  muft  confider,  that  fometimes  Men  fin  againft  the  light 
of  their  own  Confcience,  and  fome  Men  lead  wicked  Lives 
that  have  receiv'd  good  Inftruclion.  Now  this  may  be  owing 
either  to  their  want  of  Attention,  or  to  the  force  of  their  Paf- 
fions,  and  the  tyes  they  lye  under  to  their  Temporal  Intereft. 
Man  being  full  of  Corruption  is  fway'd  to  evil  by  fo  many 
various  motives,  and  by  fo  ftrong  an  inclination  that  way,  that 
'tis  hard  for  him  to  renounce  it,  without  an  abfolute  Neceffity. 
Adario.  When  you  fpeak  of  Man,  you  ought  to  fay 
French-Man;  for  you  know  that  the  Paflions,  the  Intereft, 
and  the  Corruption  we  fpeak  of,  are  not  known  among  us : 
But  that  is  not  the  Point  I  would  be  at.  Do  ye  hear,  my 
Brother,  I  have  talk'd  frequently  to  the  French  of  all  the 
Vices  that  reign  among  them ;  and  when  I  have  made  it  out 
that  they  have  no  regard  to  the  Laws  of  their  Religion,  they 
confefs'd  that  'twas  true,  and  that  they  faw  it  plainly  and 
knew  it  to  be  fo  ;  but  at  the  fame  time  they  faid  'twas  impoffi- 
ble  for  them  to  obferve  thofe  Lav/s  :  Upon  that  I  ask'd  'em 
if  they  did  not  believe  then  that  their  Souls  would  be  doom'd 
to  eternal  Flames;  and  receiv'd  this  anfwer,  [in]  That  the 
Mercy  of  God  is  fo  great,  that  whoever  trnfls  in  his  Goodnefs  fhall 
be  Sav'd;  that  the  Gofpel  is  a  Covenant  of  Grace,  in  which  God 
condefcends  to  the  Condition  and  TVeaknefs  of  Man,  who  is  templed 
by  fo  many  violent  and  frequent  A ttra olives,  that  he  is  fore' d  to  give 
way ;  and  that  this  World  being  a  place  of  Corruption,  there  can 
be  no  Purity  in  Corrupt  Man,  unlefs  it  be  in  the  Country  where 


54o  Some  New  Voyages 

God  refides.  This,  I  think,  is  a  lefs  rigid  fort  of  Morality  than 
that  of  the  Jefuits,  who  fend  us  to  Hell  for  a  Trifle.  Your 
French  Men  have  reafon  to  fay,  That  'tis  impojfible  to  keep  that 
Law ;  fo  long  as  the  diftinction  of  Meum  and  Tuum  is  kept 
up  among  you  :  You  need  no  other  proof  for  this  than  the 
Example  of  all  the  Savages  of  Canada,  who  notwithstanding 
their  Poverty  are  Richer  than  you,  among  whom  all  forts  of 
Crimes  are  committed  upon  the  fcore  of  that  Meum  and 
Tuum. 

Lahontan.  I  own,  my  dear  Brother,  that  thou'rt  in  the 
right  of  it ;  and  I  can't  but  admire  the  Innocence  of  all  the 
Savage  Nations  :  And  'tis  for  that  reafon  that  I  earneftly  wifh 
they  were  acquainted  with  the  Sanctity  of  our  Scriptures,  I 
mean,  that  Gofpel  that  thou  and  I  have  talk'd  fo  much  of. 
There's  nothing  wanting  but  that  to  render  their  Souls  Eter- 
nally Happy.  All  of  you  live  fo  Morally  that  you  will  then 
have  but  one  Difficulty  to  furmount  before  you  arrive  at 
Paradife;  I  mean,  that  Cuftomary  Fornication  that  prevails 
amongft  the  fingle  perfons  of  both  Sexes,  and  the  liberty  that 
the  Men  and  the  Women  take  in  breaking  their  Marriage 
Bonds,  in  order  to  a  Reciprocal  Change,  and  a  frefh  Choice. 
For  the  Great  Spirit  has  faid,  That  Death  and  Adultery  are  the 
only  two  things  that  can  break  that  indiffoluble  Bond. 

[112]  Adario.  We  mall  take  another  Opportunity  of  Dif- 
courfing  more  particularly  of  that  great  Obftacle  that  thou 
findeft  to  ftand  in  the  way  of  our  Salvation.  In  the  mean 
time,  I'll  content  my  felf  with  giving  thee  one  Reafon  with  re- 
fpect  to  one  of  the  two  Points  that  are  mention'd,  that  is,  the 


to  North- America.  541 

liberty  that  Batchelors  and  Girls  take  with  one  another.  In 
the  firft  place  the  young  Warrior  will  not  Embarque  in  a 
Married  State  till  he  has  made  fome  Campaigns  againft  the 
Iroquefe,  and  took  fome  Slaves  to  ferve  him  either  in  the  Vil- 
lage, or  at  Hunting,  Fifhing,  &c.  and  till  he  is  perfectly  well 
vers'd  in  the  Exercifes  of  Hunting,  Shooting  and  Fifhing. 
Farther,  he  will  not  enervate  himfelf  by  the  frequent  Exercife 
of  Venery,  at  a  time  when  his  Strength  enables  him  to  ferve 
his  Nation  in  oppofing  their  Enemies ;  not  to  mention  that 
he  will  not  expofe  a  Wife  and  Children  to  the  affliction  of 
feeing  him  kill'd  or  taken  Prifoner.  Now,  confidering  that 
'tis  impoffible  for  a  young  Man  to  abftain  from  the  Embraces 
of  Women  altogether,  you  muft  not  Cenfure  the  Youths  for 
keeping  Company  with  young  Women  once  or  twice  a  Month, 
nor  the  Girles  for  receiving  their  Addreffes.  Without  that 
Liberty  our  Batchelors  would  be  liable  to  great  Diforders,  as 
Experience  has  taught  me,  with  reference  to  feveral  that  ob- 
ferv'd  a  fevere  Continence  to  make  'em  run  the  better;  and 
befides,  our  Daughters  and  young  Women  would  be  there- 
by tempted  to  a  mean  fubmiflion  to  the  Embraces  of  Slaves. 
Lahontan.  Believe  me,  my  dear  Friend,  God  will  not  be 
fatisfied  with  thefe  Reafons ;  he  orders  you  either  to  Marry, 
or  to  entertain  no  Commerce  with  the  Sex:  For  everlafting 
Flames  are  entail'd  upon  one  amorous  thought  alone,  upon 
[113]  one  longing  wifh,  one  bare  defire  to  fatisfie  the  brutifh 
Paffion.  When  thou  faftens  upon  Continence  a  Character  of 
Impoffibility,  thou  giveft  God  the  lie,  for  he  injoyns  nothing 
but  what   is   poffible.     'Tis  in  our  Power  to   moderate  our 


542  Some  New  Voyages 

Paffions  when  we  will ;  there's  nothing  requir'd  towards  that 
but  our  Good-will  and  Confent.  All  Men  that  believe  in 
God  ought  to  obferve  his  Precepts,  and  to  refill  Temptations 
by  the  afliftance  of  his  Grace  which  never  fails  'em.  To 
inftance  in  the  Jefuits,  Doll  not  thee  think  that  when  they  fee 
a  pretty  Girle  in  thy  Village,  they  feel  the  Influence  of  Temp- 
tation as  well  as  other  Folks  ?  Queftionlefs  they  do  ;  but  they 
call  in  God  to  their  Afliftance ;  they  pais  the  whole  courfe  of 
their  Lives,  as  well  as  all  our  Priefts,  without  Marrying,  or 
having  any  criminal  Converfation  with  the  tender  Sex.  When 
they  put  on  the  black  Habit  they  make  folemn  Promifes  to 
God  to  that  Effect.  They  wage  an  uninterrupted  War  with 
all  Temptations,  during  the  whole  courfe  of  their  Lives,  and 
are  oblig'd  to  reach  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  by  Violence. 
When  one  therefore  is  apprehenfive  of  falling  into  that  Sin,  he 
can't  avoid  it  better  than  by  throwing  himfelf  into  a  Cloyfter. 
Adario.  I  would  not  for  ten  Beaver  Skins  lye  under  an 
obligation  of  filence  upon  this  Head.  In  the  firft  place,  that 
fet  of  Men  are  guilty  of  a  Crime  in  taking  an  Oath  of  Con- 
tinence, for  God  having  created  an  equal  number  of  Men  and 
Women,  he  mean'd  that  both  the  one  and  the  other  fhould 
be  imploy'd  in  the  Propagation  of  Mankind.  All  things 
in  Nature  multiply,  whether  Trees,  Plants,  Birds,  Beafts,  or 
Infects.  They  repeat  this  Leffon  to  us  every  Year,  and  fuch 
Perfons  as  do  not  follow  it  are  ufelefs  to  the  World,  they  do 
good  to  none  but  themfelves,  [114]  and  rob  the  Earth  of  the 
Corn  that  feeds  'em,  in  regard  that  they  convert  it  to  no  ufe, 
according  to  your  Principles.     A  fecond  Crime  that  they  are 


to  North-America.  543 

guilty  of  confifts  in  violating  their  Oath  (which  they  do 
but  too  commonly)  and  making  a  Jeft  of  their  Word  and 
Promifes  to  the  Great  Spirit.  This  Crime  draws  on  one 
or  two  more,  whether  in  Converting  with  young  Women  or 
with  other  Men's  Wives.  If  they  keep  Company  with  Girles, 
'tis  manifeft  that  by  Deflowring  'em  they  rob  'em  of  what 
they  can  never  return ;  I  mean,  they  rob  'em  of  that  Flower, 
which  the  French  have  fuch  an  itch  to  gather  themfelves 
when  they  Marry,  and  which  they  look  upon  as  fo  valuable 
a  Treafure,  that  a  Robbery  of  that  Nature  is  reckon'd  a 
Crime  of  the  higheft  demerit.  Another  Crime  they  are 
guilty  of  confifts  in  ufing  the  abominable  precaution  of  doing 
things  by  halves  to  prevent  Impregnation.  If  they  court  the 
Embraces  of  Married  Women,  they  ftand  accountable  for 
the  Adultery,  and  for  the  Injury  that  the  Woman  does  to 
her  Husband.  Farther;  the  Children  fpringing  from  thofe 
Adulterous  Embraces  are  Robbers  and  Interlopers,  that  live 
upon  the  Means  of  a  pretended  Father  and  half  Brethren. 
In  a  fifth  place,  they  are  chargeable  with  the  unlawful  and  pro- 
phane  Methods  that  they  take  to  ftifle  their  Brutifh  Paflion ; 
for  they  being  the  Perfons  that  Preach  your  Gofpel,  they  give 
a  quite  different  turn  to  things  in  private  to  what  they  do  pub- 
lickly,  or  elfe  they  could  never  find  a  Salvo  for  their  Libertinifm 
which  the  Vulgar  take  for  a  Crime.  Thou  art  fenfible,  my 
Friend,  that  I  fpeak  juftly  upon  the  Point,  and  that  in  France 
I  have  feen  fome  of  thefe  Black  Priefts  that  would  not  hide 
their  Talent  under  their  Caps  when  they  came  into  the  Com- 
pany of  Women.     [115]  Give  me  leave,  my  dear  Brother,  to 


544  Some  New  Voyages 

tell  thee  once  more  that  'tis  impoffible  for  thefe  Men  to  be 
without  the  Converfation  of  Women  at  a  certain  Age,  and 
far  lefs  to  be  free  from  amorous  Thoughts.  As  for  that 
Refiftance  and  thofe  vigorous  Efforts  thou  fpeak'ft  of,  that's 
but  a  frivolous  and  poor  Plea,  as  well  as  their  idle  pretence  of 
avoiding  the  Temptation  by  being  mew'd  up  in  a  Convent. 
If  Convents  are  Antidotes  againft  Temptation,  why  do  you 
fuffer  the  young  Priefts  and  Monks  to  Confefs  Maids  and 
Married  Women?  Is  that  the  way  to  avoid  the  Temptation ; 
or  is  it  not  rather  a  plain  contrivance  for  a  handfome  Oppor- 
tunity? What  Man  in  the  World  can  hear  the  Amorous 
Intrigues  of  the  confefling  Ladies,  without  being  Tranfported, 
efpecially  if  he  be  one  of  thofe  who  injoy  Health,  Youth  and 
Strength,  who  live  without  Fatigue  or  Working,  and  who  en- 
courage Nature  with  the  moft  Nouriming  Liquors  and  Food, 
feafon'd  with  I  do  not  know  how  many  Drugs  and  Spices, 
that  are  fufficient  to  inflame  the  Blood  without  any  other 
Provocation?  For  my  part,  after  a  due  Confederation  of 
thefe  Articles,  I  fhall  not  think  it  ftrange  if  there  be  not 
fo  much  as  one  Ecclefiaftick  in  the  Paradife  of  the  Great 
Spirit.  And  pray,  how  have  you  the  Confidence  to  maintain 
that  this  Cattel  turn  Monks  and  Priefts  in  order  to  avoid 
Sin,  when  you  know  they  are  addicled  to  all  manner  of  Vice? 
I  have  been  inform'd  by  French  Men  of  very  good  Senfe,  that 
thofe  who  enter  into  Priefts  or  Monks  Orders  among  you, 
have  no  other  view  than  to  live  at  their  eafe,  without  the 
fatigue  of  Work,  and  without  the  difquieting  fears  of  dying 
for  Hunger  or  being  oblig'd  to  venture  their  Lives  in  the 


to  North- America.  545 

Army.  If  you  would  have  your  Priefts  good  Men,  they 
ought  [116]  to  be  all  Married,  and  to  live  with  their  refpecl- 
ive  Families ;  or  elfe  they  mould  be  all  above  Sixty  Years 
of  Age.  Then  indeed  they  might  Confefs,  Preach  and  vifit 
Families  without  Scruple,  and  Edifie  all  the  World  by  their 
Example.  Then,  I  fay,  'twould  not  be  in  their  Power  to 
feduce  Maids  or  married  Women;  their  Age  and  their  Con- 
duct would  fpeak  them  Wife,  Moderate  and  Confederate ;  and 
at  the  fame  time  the  Nation  would  fuftain  no  lofs  by  their 
being  fet  apart  for  Divine  Service,  in  regard  that  after  Sixty 
Years  of  Age  they  are  not  fit  for  Warlike  Exploits. 

Lahontan.  I  told  you  before,  that  you  ought  not  to  charge 
the  whole  World  with  the  Mifdemeanours  of  a  few.  'Tis  true 
there  are  fome  who  take  upon  'em  Monks  or  Priefts  Orders, 
with  no  other  defign  than  to  fubfift  handfomely ;  and  unmind- 
ful of  the  devoirs  of  their  Miniftry,  think  of  nothing  but 
calling  in  their  yearly  Rents.  I  own  that  fome  of  'em  are 
Drunkards,  and  extravagant  in  their  Actions  and  Words; 
that  among  fome  of  'em  who  are  wedded  to  their  Intereft, 
Sordid  Avarice  bears  the  Afcendant ;  that  fome  are  Proud 
and  Implacable  in  the  way  of  Refentment ;  that  fome  of  'em 
are  Whore-mafters,  Debauchees,  Swearers,  Hypocrites,  Igno- 
rant Fellows,  Worldly  minded,  Backbiters,  &c.  But  their 
number  is  but  very  inconfiderable  with  refpect  to  the  whole ; 
for  the  Church  receives  none  but  the  wifer  and  graver  fort  of 
Men,  of  whom  they  have  fome  moral  Affurances,  and  whom 
they  try  and  endeavour  to  know  throughly  before  they  admit 

'em :  Tho'  after  all  their  precaution  it  can't  be  otherwife  but 
35 


546  Some  New  Voyages 

that  they  rauft  be  impos'd  upon  fometimes ;  and  indeed  this 
is  a  great  Misfortune,  for  when  the  Con  duel  of  Ecclefiafticks 
is  blacken'd  with  fuch  [117]  Vices,  it  raifes  the  greateft  Scan- 
dal that  can  be  ;  the  Sacred  Word  is  polluted  in  their  Mouths, 
the  Laws  of  God  are  contemn'd,  Divine  Things  are  difre- 
fpected,  the  Office  of  the  Miniftry  is  debas'd,  Religion  in 
general  is  trampled  under  Foot,  and  the  People  making  off 
the  due  regard  to  Religion  give  way  to  an  uncontroul'd 
Licencioufnefs.  But  in  the  mean  time  you  ought  to  confider, 
that  in  fuch  Cafes  we  take  our  Meafures  from  their  Doctrine 
more  than  from  the  Example  of  fuch  fcandalous  Ecclefiafticks; 
we  are  not  upon  the  fame  lay  with  you  who  have  not  the  necef- 
fary  Difcretion  to  diftinguifh  the  Doctrine  from  the  Example, 
and  to  remain  unfhaken  by  the  Scandalous  Lives  of  thofe  you 
faw  at  Paris,  whofe  Converfation  and  Sermons  were  far  from 
being  of  a  piece.  In  fine,  all  that  I  have  to  fay  upon  this 
Head,  turns  upon  this,  that  the  Pope  having  given  exprefs 
Orders  to  our  Bifhops  not  to  confer  the  Ecclefiaftical  Dignity 
upon  any  unworthy  Object,  they  take  all  the  Precaution  imag- 
inable, and  at  the  fame  time  ufe  their  utmoft  Efforts  to  reclaim 
thofe  who  have  already  gone  aftray. 

Adario.  I  am  furpris'd  to  find  that  you  give  all  along  fuch 
fuperficial  Anfwers  to  all  the  Objections  I  have  offer'd.  I 
perceive  that  you  court  Digreflions,  and  always  depart  from 
the  Subject  of  my  Queftions.  But  fince  'tis  fo,  I'll  come  to 
the  Pope  then ;  and  with  reference  to  that  Point,  you  muft 
know  that  one  Day  at  New  York  an  Englijh-m^n  gave  me  to 
know  that  the  Pope  was  fuch  another  Man  as  he  or  I  was; 


to  North-Kmtnca..  547 

but  that  he  fent  every  body  to  Hell  that  he  Excommunicated ; 
that  he  releas'd  whom  he  pleas'd  from  a  fecond  place  of  Tor- 
ment, that  it  feems  you  have  forgot,  and  open'd  the  Gates  of 
the  Great  Spirit's  Country  to  fuch  Perfons  as  he  lik'd,  as 
being  [118]  intrufted  with  the  Keys  of  that  upper  Region. 
If  all  this  be  true,  methinks  all  his  Friends  mould  kill  them- 
felves  when  he  expires,  that  they  may  croud  in  along  with  him 
when  he  opens  the  Gates  for  himfelf;  and  if  it  be  in  his 
Power  to  fend  Souls  to  Hell,  'tis  a  dangerous  thing  to  be 
rank'd  in  the  number  of  his  Enemies.  At  the  fame  time, 
I  was  inform'd  by  that  Englijh  Gentleman,  that  this  Papal 
Authority  had  no  footing  in  England,  and  that  the  Englljli 
ridicul'd  it.  Now,  prithee,  tell  me  whether  this  Englifli  Chrif- 
tian  fpoke  the  truth,  or  not. 

Lahontan.  The  unfolding  of  this  queftion  would  run  me 
out  to  fo  wide  a  compafs  of  things,  that  I  mould  not  have 
done,  not  in  fifteen  days.  The  Jefuits  will  fatisfie  you  upon 
that  point  better  than  I  can  pretend  to.  However  I'll  take 
the  liberty  to  fay  one  thing,  namely:  That  the  Englijh  Man 
rally'd  and  jeer'd  while  he  mention'd  fome  things  that  were 
true.  He  had  a  great  deal  of  reafon  to  perfuade  you  that 
thofe  of  his  Religion,  did  not  depend  upon  the  Pope  for  their 
Paffage  to  Heaven,  becaufe  that  lively  Faith  which  you  and  I 
fpoke  of  before,  conduces  'em  thither  without  any  regard  to 
that  holy  Man.  The  Son  of  God  is  willing  to  fave  all  the 
Englifn  by  his  Blood  and  Merits.  And  thus  you  fee  that  they 
are  happier  than  the  French,  of  whom  God  has  requir'd  good 
Works  that  they  fcarce  ever  mind,  and  who  are  doom'd  to 


548  Some  New  Voyages 

everlafting  Flames,  if  their  evil  Actions  run  counter  to  the 
above  mention'd  Commandments  of  God  ;  tho'  at  the  fame 
time,  both  they  and  we  are  of  the  fame  Faith.  As  to  the 
fecond  flaming  place,  which  we  call  Purgatory,  they  are  ex- 
empted from  the  neceffity  of  paffing  thro'  it ;  becaufe  they'd 
rather  choofe  to  continue  upon  Earth  thro'  all  the  Ages  of 
Eternity  without  vifiting  Paradife,  than  to  Burn  [119]  for 
fome  thoufands  of  years  by  the  way.  They  are  fo  tender 
upon  this  point  of  Honour,  that  they'll  never  accept  of  any 
Prefent  at  the  purchafe  of  bearing  fome  Baftinadoes.  Accord- 
ing to  their  Notions  of  things,  they  do  not  take  a  man  to  be 
oblig'd  by  the  giving  him  Mony  and  hard  Ufage  at  the  fame 
time :  This  is  rather  an  affront  in  their  way.  But  the  French, 
who  are  lefs  nice  upon  the  point ;  they  take  it  for  a  mighty 
favour,  that  they're  allowed  to  burn  for  an  infinity  of  Ages  in 
Purgatory,  upon  the  apprehenfion  that  by  that  means,  they  will 
be  better  acquainted  with  the  true  value  of  Heaven.  Now  for 
as  much  as  the  Pope  is  the  Creditor  of  the  Englifli,  and 
demands  Reftitution  of  his  own,  they  are  far  from  asking  his 
Pardons ;  that  is,  his  Paffports  for  removing  to  Heaven  with- 
out touching  at  Purgatory  ;  for  if  they  did,  he  would  order  'em 
a  Pafs  to  that  fort  of  Hell,  which  they  pretend  was  never 
made  for  'em.  But  we  French  Folks  that  pay  him  good  round 
Annuities,  being  acquainted  with  his  Wonder- Working  Power, 
and  affected  with  a  fenfe  of  our  Sins  againft  God ;  we,  I  fay, 
that  lye  under  fuch  Circumftances,  muft  of  neceffity  have 
recourfe  to  the  Indulgences  of  that  holy  Man,  in  order  to 
obtain  a  Pardon  that  he  has  Power  to  grant ;  for  if  one  of  us 


to  iV0/tZ>-America  549 

be  Condemn'd  to  lye  forty  years  in  Purgatory  before  he  is 
remov'd  to  Heaven,  why,  'twill  coft  the  Pope  but  one  Word 
to  get  the  Sentence  Revers'd.  In  fine,  to  repeat  once  more 
what  I  faid  before,  the  Jefuits  will  inform  you  admirably  well, 
of  the  Authority  and  Power  of  the  Pope,  and  of  the  State  of 
Purgatory. 

Adario.  I  am  at  a  lofs  to  know  how  to  form  a  diftincl:  Idea 
of  the  difference  between  you  and  the  Engli/h,  as  to  the  point 
of  Belief ;  for  the  more  I  endeavour  to  have  it  fet  in  a  clearer 
light,  [120]  the  lefs  light  I  find.  To  my  mind,  the  beft  way 
for  all  of  you  is  to  agree  upon  this  conclufion ;  That  the 
Great  Spirit  has  beftow'd  upon  all  Men,  a  Light  fufficient  to 
fhew  'em  what  they  ought  to  do,  without  running  the  rifque 
of  being  impos'd  upon  :  For  I  have  heard  that  in  each  of  thefe 
different  Religions,  there's  an  infinite  number  of  Perfons  of 
different  Opinions.  To  inftance  in  your  Religion ;  every 
religious  Order  maintains  certain  Points  that  the  reft  do  not, 
and  obferves  as  great  a  diverfity  in  their  Institutions  as  in  their 
Habits.  This  makes  me  think  that  in  Europe  every  particular 
Man  forms  a  peculiar  Religion  to  himfelf,  which  differs  from 
that  which  he  outwardly  profeffes.  As  for  my  own  part,  I 
firmly  believe  that  Men  are  not  capable  of  knowing  what  the 
Great  Spirit  requires  of  'em;  and  I  can't  diffuade  my  felf  from 
believing,  that  fince  the  Great  Spirit  is  fo  juft  and  fo  good, 
'tis  impoflible  that  his  Juftice  fhould  render  the  Salvation  of 
Mankind  fo  difficult,  as  that  all  of  'em  fhould  be  Damn'd  that 
are  not  retainers  to  your  Religion,  and  that  even  few  of  the 
Profeffors  of  it  mould  be  admitted  into  Paradife.    Believe  me, 


55°  Some  New  Voyages 

my  Friend ;  the  other  World  goes  upon  a  lay  that's  quite  dif- 
ferent from  what  we  have  in  this.  Few  People  know  what 
paffes  there:  All  our  knowledge  amounts  only  to  this;  That 
we  Hurons  are  not  the  Authours  of  our  own  Creation,  that 
the  Great  Spirit  has  vouchfaf'd  us  an  honeft  Mould,  while 
Wickednefs  neftles  in  yours ;  and  that  he  fends  you  into  our 
Country,  in  order  to  have  an  opportunity  of  Correcting  your 
Faults,  and  following  our  Example.  Purfuant  to  this  Prin- 
ciple, my  Brother,  thou  may'ft  believe  as  long  as  thou  wilt, 
and  have  as  much  Faith  as  thou  haft  a  mind  to :  But  after  all, 
thou  fhalt  never  fee  the  good  Country  of  Souls,  unlefs  thou 
[121]  turn'ft  Huron.  The  Innocence  of  our  Lives,  the  Love 
we  tender  to  our  Brethren,  and  the  Tranquility  of  Mind  which 
we  injoy  in  contemning  the  meafures  of  Intereft :  These,  I  fay, 
are  three  things  that  the  Great  Spirit  requires  of  all  Men  in 
General.  We  pra<5tife  all  thefe  Duties  in  our  Villages,  natur- 
ally; while  the  Europeans  defame,  kill,  rob,  and  pull  one 
another  to  pieces,  in  their  Towns.  The  Europeans  have  a 
ftrong  mind  to  Inherit  a  Place  in  the  Country  of  Souls,  and 
yet  they  never  think  of  their  Creator,  but  when  they  difpute 
with  the  Hurons.  Fare  well,  my  dear  Brother ;  it  grows  late : 
I'll  now  retire  to  my  Hutt,  in  order  to  recoiled:  all  the  ad- 
vances thou  haft  made,  that  I  may  call  'em  to  mind  to  morrow, 
when  I  come  to  reafon  the  Point  with  the  Jefuits. 


to  North- America.  551 


Of  Laws. 


Labon-  TT7ELL,  my  Friend;  thou  haft  heard  what  the 
tan.  V  V     Jefuit   had   to  fay ;    he  has  fet  matters   in   a 

clear  light,  and  made  'em  much  plainer  than  I  could  do.  You 
fee  plainly  there's  a  great  difference  between  his  Arguments 
and  mine.  We  Soldiers  of  Fortune  have  only  a  fuperficial 
knowledge  of  our  Religion,  tho'  indeed  we  ought  to  know  it 
better;  but  the  Jefuits  have  Study'd  it  to  that  degree,  that 
they  never  fail  of  converting  and  convincing  the  moft  obftinate 
Infidels  in  the  Univerfe. 

Adario.  To  be  free  with  thee,  my  dear  Brother,  I  could 
fcarce  underftand  one  tittle  of  what  he  meant,  and  I  am  much 
miftaken  if  he  underftands  it  himfelf.  He  has  repeated  the 
very  [122]  fame  Arguments  a  hundred  times  in  my  Hutt ; 
and  you  might  have  obferv'd,  that  yefterday  I  anfwer'd  above 
twenty  times,  that  I  had  heard  his  Arguments  before  upon 
feveral  occafions.  But,  what  I  take  to  be  moft  ridiculous, 
he  teazes  me  every  minute  to  get  me  to  interpret  his  Argu- 
ments, word  for  word,  to  my  Countrymen ;  upon  the  Plea 
that  a  Man  of  my  Senfe  may  find  out  in  his  own  Language, 
more  fignificant  terms,  and  render  the  meaning  of  his  Words 
more  Intelligible,  than  a  Jefuit  who  is  not  throughly  Mafter 
of  the  Huron  Language.  You  heard  me  tell  him,  that  he 
might  Baptife  as  many  Children  as  he   pleas'd,  tho'  at  the 


552  Some  New  Voyages 

fame  time  he  could  not  give  me  to  know  what  Baptifm  was. 
He  may  do  what  he  pleafes  in  my  Village ;  let  him  make 
Chriftians,  and  Preach,  and  Baptife  if  he  will ;  I  fhall  not 
hinder  him.  But  now,  methinks,  we  have  had  enough  of 
Religion,  let  us  therefore  talk  a  little  of  what  you  call  Laws ; 
for  you  know  that  we  have  no  fuch  Word  in  our  Language ; 
tho'  at  the  fame  time,  I  apprehend  the  force  and  importance 
of  the  Word,  by  vertue  of  the  explication  I  had  from  you 
t'other  day,  together  with  the  examples  you  mention'd,  to 
make  me  conceive  what  you  meant.  Prithee  tell  me,  are  not 
Laws  the  fame  as  juft  and  reafonable  Things  ?  You  fay  they 
are.  Why  then,  to  obferve  the  Law,  imports  no  more  than  to 
obferve  the  meafures  of  Reafon  and  Juftice :  And  at  this  rate 
you  rauft  take  juft  and  reafonable  things  in  another  fenfe 
than  we  do ;  or  if  you  take  'em  in  the  fame  fenfe.  'tis  plain 
you  never  obferve  'em. 

Lahontan.  Thefe  are  fine  Diftinclions  indeed,  you  pleafe 
your  felf  with  idle  Flams.  Haft  not  thee  the  Senfe  to  per- 
ceive, after  twenty  Years  Converfation  with  the  French,  that 
what  the  Hurons  [123]  call  Reafon  is  Reafon  among  the 
French.  'Tis  certain  that  all  Men  do  not  obferve  the  Laws 
of  Reafon,  for  if  they  did  there  would  be  no  occafion  for  Pun- 
ifhments,  and  thofe  Judges  thou  haft  feen  at  Paris  and  Quebec 
would  be  oblig'd  to  look  out  for  another  way  of  Living.  But 
in  regard  that  the  good  of  the  Society  confifts  in  doing  Juftice 
and  following  thefe  Laws,  there's  a  neceftity  of  punifhing  the 
Wicked  and  rewarding  the  Good ;  for  without  that  Precau- 
tion Murthers,    Robberies   and   Defamations   would   fpread 


to  North- America.  553 

every  where,  and  in  a  Word,  we  fhould  be  the  moft  miferable 
People  upon  the  Face  of  the  Earth. 

Adario.  Nay,  you  are  miferable  enough  already,  and  indeed 
I  can't  fee  how  you  can  be  more  fuch.  What  fort  of  Men 
muft  the  Europeans  be?  What  Species  of  Creatures  do  they 
retain  to  ?  The  Europeans,  who  muft  be  forc'd  to  do  Good, 
and  have  no  other  Prompter  for  the  avoiding  of  Evil  than  the 
fear  of  Punifhment.  If  I  ask'd  thee,  what  a  Man  is,  thou 
wouldft  anfwer  me,  He's  a  Frenchman,  and  yet  I'll  prove  that 
your  Man  is  rather  a  Beaver.  For  Man  is  not  intitled  to  that 
Character  upon  the  fcore  of  his  walking  upright  upon  two 
Legs,  or  of  Reading  and  Writing,  and  fhewing  a  Thoufand 
other  Inftances  of  his  Induftry.  I  call  that  Creature  a  Man, 
that  hath  a  natural  inclination  to  do  Good,  and  never  enter- 
tains the  thoughts  of  doing  Evil.  You  fee  we  have  no  Judges; 
and  what's  the  reafon  of  that?  Why?  We  neither  quarrel 
nor  fue  one  another.  And  what's  the  reafon  that  we  have  no 
Law  Suits  ?  Why  ?  Becaufe  we  are  refolved  neither  to  receive 
nor  to  know  Silver.  But  why  do  we  refufe  admiffion  to  Silver 
among  us?  The  reafon  is  this;  We  are  refolv'd  to  have  no 
Laws,  for  fince  the  World  [124]  was  a  World  our  Anceftors 
liv'd  happily  without  'em.  In  fine,  as  I  intimated  before,  the 
Word  Laws  does  not  fignifie  juft  and  reafonable  things  as  you 
ufe  it,  for  the  Rich  make  a  Jeft  of  'em,  and  'tis  only  the  poor 
Wretches  that  pay  any  regard  to  'em.  But,  pray,  let's  look 
into  thefe  Laws,  or  reafonable  things,  as  you  call  'em.  For 
thefe  Fifty  Years,  the  Governors  of  Canada  have  ftill  alledg'd 
that  we  are  fubject  to  the  Laws  of  their  great  Captain.     We 


554  Some  New  Voyages 

content  our  felves  in  denying  all  manner  of  Dependance, 
excepting  that  upon  the  Great  Spirit,  as  being  born  free  and 
joint  Brethren,  who  are  all  equally  Matters:  Whereas  you  are 
all  Slaves  to  one  Man.  We  do  not  put  in  any  fuch  Anfwer  to 
you,  as  if  the  French  depended  upon  us  ;  and  the  reafon  of  our 
filence  upon  that  Head  is,  that  we  have  no  mind  to  Quarrel. 
But,  pray  tell  me,  what  Authority  or  Right  is  the  pretended 
Superiority  of  your  great  Captain  grounded  upon?  Did  we 
ever  fell  our  felves  to  that  great  Captain?  Were  we  ever  in 
France  to  look  after  you  ?  'Tis  you  that  came  hither  to  find 
out  us.  Who  gave  you  all  the  Countries  that  you  now  inhabit, 
by  what  Right  do  you  poffefs  'em?  They  always  belong'd 
to  the  Algonkins  before.  In  earneft,  my  dear  Brother,  I'm 
forry  for  thee  from  the  bottom  of  my  Soul.  Take  my  advice, 
and  turn  Huron;  for  I  fee  plainly  a  vaft  difference  between 
thy  Condition  and  mine.  I  am  Mafter  of  my  own  Body,  I 
have  the  abfolute  difpofal  of  my  felf,  I  do  what  I  pleafe,  I  am 
the  firft  and  the  laft  of  my  Nation,  I  fear  no  Man,  and  I 
depend  only  upon  the  Great  Spirit:  Whereas  thy  Body,  as 
well  as  thy  Soul,  are  doom'd  to  a  dependance  upon  thy  great 
Captain ;  thy  Vice-Roy  difpofes  of  thee ;  thou  haft  not  the 
liberty  of  doing  what  thou  haft  a  mind  to ;  thou'rt  affraid  of 
Robbers,  [125]  falfe  Witneffes,  Affaflins,  &V.  and  thou  de- 
pendent upon  an  infinity  of  Perfons  whofe  Places  have  rais'd 
'em  above  thee.  Is  it  true,  or  not?  Are  thefe  things  either 
improbable  or  invifible  ?  Ah !  my  dear  Brother,  thou  feeft 
plainly  that  I  am  in  the  right  of  if,  and  yet  thou  choofeft 
rather  to  be  a  French  Slave  than  a  free  Huron.    What  a  fine 


to  TVor^-America.  555 

Spark  does  a  Frenchman  make  with  his  fine  Laws,  who  taking 
himfelf  to  be  mighty  Wife  is  affuredly  a  great  Fool ;  for  as 
much  as  he  continues  in  Slavery  and  a  ftate  of  Dependence, 
while  the  very  Brutes  enjoy  that  adorable  Liberty,  and  like  us 
fear  nothing  but  Foreign  Enemies. 

Lahontan.  Indeed,  my  Friend,  thy  way  of  Reafoning  is  as 
Savage  as  thy  felf.  I  did  not  think  that  a  Man  of  Senfe,  who 
hath  been  in  France  and  New  England,  would  fpeak  after  that 
Fafhion.  What  benefit  haft  thou  reap'd  by  having  feen  our 
Cities,  Forts  and  Palaces?  When  thou  talk'ft  of  fevere  Laws, 
of  Slavery,  and  a  Thoufand  other  idle  Whims,  queftionlefs 
thou  preacheft  contrary  to  thy  own  Sentiments.  Thou  takeft 
pleafure  in  difcanting  upon  the  Felicity  of  the  Hurons,  a  fet  of 
Men  who  mind  nothing  but  Eating,  Drinking,  Sleeping,  Hunt- 
ing, and  Fifhing ;  who  have  not  the  enjoyment  of  any  one 
Conveniency  of  Life,  who  travel  four  Hundred  Leagues  on 
Foot  to  knock  four  Iroquefe  on  the  Head,  in  a  Word,  who 
have  no  more  than  the  fhape  of  Men  :  Whereas  we  have  our 
Conveniences,  our  unbending  Diverfions,  and  a  Thoufand 
other  Pleafures,  which  render  the  Minutes  of  our  Life  fup- 
portable.  To  avoid  the  lafh  of  thofe  Laws  which  are  fevere 
only  upon  wicked  and  criminal  Perfons,  one  needs  only  to 
live  honeftly,  and  offer  Injuries  to  no  man. 

[126]  Adario.  Ay,  my  dear  Brother,  your  being  an  honeft 
Man  would  not  avail  you ;  if  two  falfe  Witneffes  fwear  againft 
you,  you'll  prefently  fee  whether  your  Laws  are  fevere  or  not. 
Have  not  the  Coureurs  de  Bois  quoted  me  twenty  inftances  of 
Perfons  that  have  been  cruelly  put  to  death  by  the  lafh  of 


556  Some  New  Voyages 

your  Laws,  whofe  Innocence  has  appear'd  after  their  death  ? 
What  truth  there  is  in  their  Relations,  I  do  not  pretend  to 
know ;  but  'tis  plain  that  fuch  a  thing  may  happen.  I  have 
heard  'em  fay  farther  (and  indeed  I  had  heard  the  fame  thing 
in  France  before)  that  poor  innocent  Men  are  Tortur'd  in  a 
mod  horrible  manner,  in  order  to  force  'em  by  the  violence 
of  their  Torment  to  a  Confeffion  of  all  that  is  charg'd  upon 
'em,  and  of  ten  times  more.  What  execrable  Tyranny  muft 
this  be  !  Tho'  the  French  pretend  to  be  Men,  yet  the  Women 
are  not  exempted  from  this  horrid  Cruelty,  no  more  than  the 
Men ;  both  the  one  and  the  other  choofe  rather  to  die  once 
than  to  die  fifty  times.  And  indeed  they  are  in  the  right  of 
it :  For  if  it  mould  happen  that  by  the  influence  of  extra- 
ordinary courage,  they  were  capable  of  undergoing  fuch 
Torments  without  confeffing  a  Crime  that  they  never  com- 
mitted ;  what  health,  what  manner  of  life  can  they  enjoy  there- 
after? No,  no,  my  dear  Brother,  the  black  Devils  that  the 
Jefuits  talk  fo  much  of,  are  not  in  the  Regions  where  Souls 
burn  in  Flames,  but  in  Quebec  and  in  France,  where  they  keep 
Company  with  the  Laws,  the  falfe  Witnefles,  the  Conveniencies 
of  Life,  the  Cities,  the  Fortreffes  and  the  Pleafures  vou  fpoke 
of  but  now. 

Lahontan.  The  Coureurs  de  Bois  and  the  other  Sparks  who 
told  you  fuch  Stories,  without  acquainting  you  with  the  other 
Circumftances  that  they  knew  nothing  of,  are  Block-heads 
that  had  [127]  better  have  held  their  peace.  I'll  fet  the 
whole  matter  before  thee,  in  its  clear  and  natural  colours. 
Suppofe,  two  falfe  Witneffes  depofe  againft  a  Man ;  they  are 


/■>■  59- 


A  favaoe  At//t*y*t  Se 
tv,tA  n  ft 


iiifi    iiiii    liipt 

if*    &M»P       !i,   If-'i  ■■■:      i   '' 


to  North- America.  557 

prefently  put  into  two  feparate  Rooms,  where  they  can't  fee 
or  converfe  with  one  another.  Then  they  are  examin'd  one 
after  another  upon  the  Articles  charg'd  againft  the  Perfon 
Arraign'd  ;  and  the  Judges  are  of  fuch  tender  Confciences, 
as  to  ufe  their  utmoft  efforts  to  difcover  whether  one  or  both 
of  'em  vary's,  as  to  the  Circumftances.  If  they  happen  to 
perceive  any  falfity  in  their  depofitions,  which  is  eafily  per- 
ceiv'd,  they  Sentence  'em  to  die  without  remiffion.  But  if  it 
appears  that  they  are  fo  far  from  contradicting,  that  they 
back  one  another,  they  are  prefented  before  the  Prifoner, 
to  fee  if  he  has  any  Objection  to  make  againft  'em,  and  if  he 
is  willing  to  rely  upon  their  Confciences.  If  he  has  nothing 
to  object,  and  if  the  two  Witneffes  Swear  by  the  Great  Spirit, 
that  they  faw  him  Murder,  Rob,  &c.  the  Judges  condemn 
him  out  of  hand.  As  for  Torture,  'tis  never  made  ufe  of, 
but  when  there's  only  one  Witnefs,  whofe  Oath  can't  infer 
Death ;  for  the  Law  which  requires  the  Teftimony  of  two 
Men  for  a  fufficient  Proof,  looks  upon  the  Atteftation  of  one 
but  as  half  a  Proof.  But  at  the  fame  time,  you  muft  remark 
that  the  Judges  take  all  imaginable  Precaution  to  avoid  the 
parting  of  an  unjuft  Sentence. 

Adar'io.  I'm  e'en  as  wife  as  I  was ;  for  when  all  comes  to 
all,  the  two  falfe  Witneffes  have  a  perfect  good  underftanding 
between  themfelves,  before  they  are  brought  to  the  Bar,  and 
they  are  not  to  feek  for  the  Anfwers  they  are  to  make :  And 
I  find  the  depofition  of  one  Scoundrel  will  put  a  Man  to  the 
Rack  as  well  as  that  of  an  honeft  Man ;  who  in  my  Opinion 
do's  juftly  forfeit  [128]  the  Character  of  Honefty  by  fuch  a 


558  Some  New  Voyages 

depofition,  even  when  he  has  feen  the  Crime  committed. 
The  French  are  a  fine  fort  of  People,  who  are  fo  far  from 
faving  one  another's  Lives,  like  Brethren,  that  they  refufe  to 
do  it  when  'tis  in  their  power.  But,  prithee,  tell  me ;  what 
doft  thou  think  of  thefe  Judges?  Is  it  true  that  fome  of  'em 
are  fo  ignorant  as  they  are  faid  to  be ;  and  that  others  are  fo 
Wicked  as  to  pronounce  unjufl  Judgments  contrary  to  their 
own  Confciences;  with  intent  to  favour  a  Friend,  or  to  oblige 
a  Miftrefs  or  a  great  Lord,  or  to  hook  in  Mony.  I  forefee 
thou'lt  reply  that  the  Allegation  is  falfe,  and  that  Laws  are 
juft  and  reafonable  things.  But  at  the  fame  time,  I  know  'tis 
as  true  as  that  we  are  here ;  for  a  Man  that  demands  his 
Eftate  of  another  who  is  unjuftly  poffefs'd  of  it,  and  makes 
the  Innocence  of  his  Caufe  to  appear  as  clear  as  the  Sun- 
fhine ;  that  very  Man,  I  fay,  mall  never  make  any  thing  of 
his  Suit;  if  the  great  Lord,  the  Miftrefs,  the  Friend,  and 
the  Mony  bufinefs,  fpeak  on  the  Adverfary's  behalf,  to  the 
Judges  who  are  empower'd  to  decide  the  Caufe.  The  fame 
is  the  cafe  of  perfons  Arraign'd  for  Crimes.  Ha  !  Long  live 
the  Hurons;  who  without  Laws,  without  Prifons,  and  without 
Torture,  pafs  their  Life  in  a  State  of  Sweetnefs  and  Tran- 
quility, and  enjoy  a  pitch  of  Felicity  to  which  the  French  are 
utter  Strangers.  We  live  quietly  under  the  Laws  of  Inftinct 
and  innocent  Conduct,  which  wife  Nature  has  imprinted  upon 
our  Minds  from  our  Cradles.  We  are  all  of  one  Mind ;  our 
Wills,  Opinions  and  Sentiments  obferve  an  exact  Conformity; 
and  thus  we  fpend  our  Lives  with  fuch  a  perfect  good  under- 
ftanding,  that  no  Difputes  or  Suits  can  take  place  amongft  us. 


to  North- America.  559 

But  how  unhappy  are  you  in  being  expos'd  to  the  lafh  of 
Laws,  which  your  ignorant,  [129]  unjuft,  and  vicious  Judges 
break  in  their  private  Actions,  as  well  as  in  the  Adminiftration 
of  their  Offices?  Thefe  are  your  juft  and  equitable  Judges; 
who  have  no  regard  to  Right ;  who  make  their  Intereft  the 
Standard  of  their  Conduct,  in  the  way  of  their  Office  ;  who 
have  nothing  in  view  but  the  Inriching  of  themfelves ;  who  are 
not  acceffible  by  any  but  the  Daemon  of  Silver;  who  never 
adminifter  Juftice,  but  thro'  a  Principle  of  Avarice  or  Paffion ; 
who  give  Countenance  to  Crimes,  and  fet  afide  Juftice  and 
Honefty,  in  order  to  give  a  full  range  to  Cheating,  Quarrell- 
ing, and  the  carrying  on  of  tedious  Law  Suits,  to  the  abufe 
and  violation  of  Oaths,  and  to  an  infinity  of  other  Diforders. 
This  is  the  practice  of  thefe  doughty  Affertors  of  the  fine 
Laws  of  the  French  Nation. 

Lahontan.  I  gave  you  to  know  before,  that  you  ought  not 
to  give  credit  to  all  that  every  Fool  whifpers  in  your  Ear. 
You  give  Ear  to  fome  Blockheads  that  have  not  a  tincture 
of  Common  Senfe,  and  that  fpread  lies  under  the  notion  of 
truths.  Thefe  bad  Judges,  that  they  fpeak  of,  are  as  uncom- 
mon as  white  Beavers  ;  for  'tis  a  queftion  if  there  are  four  fuch 
in  all  France.  Our  Judges  are  men  that  love  Vertue,  and  have 
Souls  to  be  fav'd  as  well  as  thee  and  I ;  being  inverted  with  a 
publick  Capacity,  they  are  to  anfwer  for  their  Conduct  before 
a  Judge  that  has  no  refpect  to  Perfons,  and  before  whom  the 
greateft  Monarch  is  no  more  than  the  meaneft  Slave.  There's 
fcarce  any  of  thefe  Men,  who  would  not  choofe  to  die,  rather 
than  wound  their  Confcience  or  violate  the  Laws.     Monv  is 


560  Some  New  Voyages 

too  bafe  a  Metal  to  tempt  'em,  and  Women  warm  'em  no 
more  than  the  Ice.  Friends  and  great  Lords  make  lefs  Im- 
preffion  upon  their  Minds,  than  the  Waves  upon  the  Rocks. 
They  curb  Libertinifm,  [130]  they  redrefs  Diforders,  and  do 
Juftice  to  all  that  Sue  for  it ;  without  the  leaft  regard  to  what 
we  call  Intereft.  As  for  my  own  part,  I  have  loft  my  whole 
Eftate  by  being  caft  in  three  or  four  Law-Suits  at  Paris ;  but 
I  would  be  loth  to  believe  that  the  Judges  are  in  fault,  not- 
withftanding  that  my  Adverfaries  found  both  Mony  and 
Friends  to  back  bad  Caufes.  'Twas  the  Law  that  gave  it 
againft  me,  and  I  take  the  Law  to  be  juft  and  reafonable, 
imputing  my  furprize  upon  the  matter,  to  my  unacquainted- 
nefs  with  that  Study. 

Adario.  I  proteft  I  don't  understand  one  word  of  what 
thou  haft  faid ;  for  I  know  the  contrary  of  what  thou  fayeft  to 
be  true,  and  thofe  who  inform'd  me  fo  of  the  Judges  are  Men 
of  undifputed  Honour  and  Senfe.  But  if  no  body  had  given 
me  any  fuch  Information,  I  am  not  fo  dull  Pated  as  not  to  fee 
with  my  own  Eyes,  the  Injuftice  of  your  Laws  and  your 
Judges.  I'll  tell  thee  one  thing  my  dear  Brother;  I  was  a 
going  one  day  from  Paris  to  Ferfailles,  and  about  half  way,  I 
met  a  Boor  that  was  going  to  be  Whipt  for  having  taken 
Partridges  and  Hares  with  Traps.  Between  Rochel  and  Paris, 
I  faw  another  that  was  Condemn'd  to  the  Gally's  for  having  a 
little  Bag  of  Salt  about  him.  Thefe  poor  Men  were  punifh'd 
by  your  unjuft  Laws,  for  endeavouring  to  get  Suftenance  to 
their  Families ;  at  a  time  when  a  Million  of  Women  were  got 
with  Child  in  the  abfence  of  their  Husbands,  when  the  Phyfi- 


to  North- America.  561 

cians  Murder'd  three  fourths  of  the  People,  and  the  Gamefters 
reduc'd  their  Families  to  a  Starving  Condition,  by  lofing  all 
they  had  in  the  World  ;  and  all  this  with  Impunity.  If  things 
go  at  this  rate,  where  are  your  juft  and  reafonable  Laws  ; 
where  are  thofe  Judges  that  have  a  Soul  to  be  Sav'd  as  well  as 
you  and  I?  After  this,  [131]  you'll  be  ready  to  Brand  the 
Huron s  for  Beafts.  In  earneft,  we  mould  have  a  fine  time  of 
it  if  we  offer'd  to  punifh  one  of  our  Brethren  for  killing  a 
Hare  or  a  Partridge  ;  and  a  glorious  fight  'twould  be,  to  fee 
our  Wives  inlarge  the  number  of  our  Children,  while  we  are 
ingag'd  in  Warlike  Expeditions  againft  our  Enemies ;  to  fee 
Phyficians  Poifon  our  Families,  and  Gamefters  lofe  the  Beaver 
Skins  they've  got  in  Hunting.  In  France,  thefe  things  are 
look'd  upon  as  trifles,  which  do  not  fall  within  the  Verge  of 
their  fine  Laws.  Doubtlefs,  they  mud  needs  be  very  blind,  that 
are  acquainted  with  us,  and  yet  do  not  imitate  our  Example. 

Lahontan.  Very  fine,  my  dear  Friend  ;  thou  goeft  too  faft; 
believe  me,  thy  Knowledge  is  fo  confin'd,  as  I  faid  before, 
that  thy  Mind  can't  reach  beyond  the  appearances  of  things. 
Wouldft  thou  but  give  Ear  to  Reafon,  thou  wouldft  prefently 
be  fenfible  that  we  act  upon  good  Principles,  for  the  fupport 
of  the  Society.  You  muft  know,  the  Laws  Condemn  all  with- 
out exception,  that  are  guilty  of  the  Actions  you've  mention'd. 
In  the  firft  place,  they  prohibit  the  Peafants  to  kill  Hares  or 
Partridges,  efpecially  in  the  Neighbourhood  of  Paris;  by 
reafon  that  an  uncontroul'd  liberty  of  Hunting,  would  quickly 
exhauft  the  whole  Stock  of  thofe  Animals.  The  Boors  Farm 
the  Grounds  of  their  Landlords,  who  referve  to  themfelves 


562  Some  New  Voyages 

the  Priviledge  of  Hunting,  as  being  Matters.  Now,  if  they 
happen  to  kill  Hares  or  Partridges,  they  not  only  rob  their 
Matters  of  their  Right,  but  fall  under  the  Prohibition  enacted 
by  the  Law :  And  the  fame  is  the  Cafe  of  thofe  who  run  Salt, 
by  reafon  that  the  Right  of  Tranfporting  it  is  folely  lodg'd 
in  the  King.  As  to  the  Women  and  the  Gamefters  that  you 
took  notice  of;  you  can't  think  fure  that  [132]  we'd  (hut  'em 
up  in  Prifons  and  Convents,  and  Condemn  'em  to  a  perpetual 
Confinement.  The  Phyficians  'twould  be  unjuft  to  abufe,  for 
of  a  hundred  Patients  they  do  not  kill  two ;  nay,  on  the  con- 
trary, they  ufe  their  utmoft  efforts  to  Cure  'em.  There's  a 
neceffity  that  Superannuated  Perfons,  and  thofe  who  are  worn 
out,  mould  put  a  Period  to  their  Lives.  And  after  all,  tho'  all 
of  us  have  occafion  to  imploy  Doctors,  if  'twere  prov'd  that 
they  had  kill'd  any  Patient,  either  thro'  Ignorance  or  Malice, 
the  Law  would  not  fpare  'em  no  more  than  others. 

Adario.  Were  thefe  Laws  obferv'd,  you  would  ftand  in 
need  of  a  great  many  Prifons ;  but  I  fee  plainly  that  you  do 
not  fpeak  all  the  truth,  and  that  you're  afraid  of  carrying  the 
Thing  farther,  leaft  my  Reafons  mould  put  you  to  a  ftand. 
However,  let's  now  caft  our  eyes  upon  thofe  two  Men  who  fled 
laft  year  to  Quebec,  to  avoid  the  being  Burnt  in  France.  If  we 
look  narrowly  into  their  Crime,  we'll  find  occafion  to  fay,  that 
Europe  is  pefter'd  with  a  great  many  foolifh  Laws.1     But,  to 


1  Sorcery  was  at  this  period  a  statutory  crime  in  France,  liable  to  be  punished  with 
death  by  burning.  There  was  a  considerable  revival  of  the  fear  of  witchcraft  under 
Louis  XIV,  the  last  law  passed  upon  the  subject  being  the  edict  of  1682.  As  late 
as  173 1,  a  Jesuit  was  condemned  by  the  parlement  of  Provence  to  be  burned  for 
sorcery. —  Ed. 


to  North-America.  563 

fpeak  to  the  purpofe  ;  thefe  two  French  Men  were  Branded 
for  Jugglers,  pretended  Magicians,  and  charg'd  with  the 
Crime  of  playing  Magical  Tricks.  Now,  what  harm  have 
thefe  poor  Fellows  done ;  perhaps  they  have  had  a  fit  of  Sick- 
nefs,  that  has  brought  'em  into  that  State  of  Simplicity  and 
Folly,  as  it  happens  fometimes  among  us.  Prithee  tell  me, 
what  harm  do  our  Jugglers  do  ?  When  a  Patient  is  recom- 
mended to  'em,  they  fhut  themfelves  up  all  alone  in  a  little 
Hutt,  where  they  Sing,  Roar,  and  Dance,  and  utter  fome 
extravagant  Expreflions ;  then  they  give  the  Patient's  Rela- 
tions to  know,  that  they  muft  prepare  a  Feaft  for  Solaceing 
the  Patient ;  and  this  Feaft  confifts  of  Flefh  or  Fifh,  according 
to  the  Humour  of  this  Juggler,  who  is  only  an  imaginary 
[133]  Phyfician,  whofe  Head  has  been  turn'd  by  fome  hot 
Feaver  or  other.  You  fee  we  rally  upon  'em  in  their  abfence, 
and  fee  thro'  the  Impofture ;  you  are  fenfible  that  they  are  as 
foolifh  in  their  Adions  as  in  their  Words,  and  that  they  never 
go  upon  Hunting  or  Warlike  Expeditions :  And  why  would 
you  Burn  the  poor  Wretches,  that  in  your  Country  fall  under 
the  fame  Misfortune  ? 

Lahontan.  There's  a  great  deal  of  difference  betv/een  our 
Jugglers  and  yours :  Thofe  of  that  ProfeiTion  among  us,  have 
interviews  with  the  evil  Spirit,  and  feaft  with  him  every  Night ; 
by  vertue  of  their  Witchcraft,  they  hinder  a  Man  from 
Imbracing  his  own  Wife ;  by  putting  a  certain  Charm  into 
the  Victuals  or  Drink  of  Vertuous  and  Wife  Ladies,  they 
draw  'em  to  Debauchery;  they  Poyfon  the  Cattel,  they  blaft 
the  Product  of  the  Earth,  they  caufe  Men  to  die  in  a  languifh- 


564  Some  New  Voyages 

ing  Condition,  and  a  Big-Belly'd  Woman  to  Mifcarry :  In 
fine,  they  do  an  infinity  of  mifchievous  Actions,  which  I  have 
not  nam'd.  This  fet  of  Men  calls  themfelves  Inchanters  and 
Sorcerers  ;  but  there's  another  fort  that  is  yet  worfe,  namely, 
the  Magicians,  who  converfe  in  a  familiar  way  with  the  evil 
Spirit,  and  get  him  to  appear  in  what  Figure  they  pleafe,  to 
thofe  who  have  the  curiofity  to  fee  him.  They  have  fecret 
Charms  that  will  procure  good  Luck  at  Gaming,  and  Inrich 
thofe  upon  whom  they  are  beftow'd  ;  they  foretel  Futurities, 
and  have  the  Power  to  transform  themfelves  into  all  forts  of 
Animals,  and  the  moft  frightful  Figures ;  they  run  about  to 
certain  Houfes,  where  theyjnake  a  fearful  Howling,  interlac'd 
with  Cries  and  difmal  Moans,  and  appear  to  be  as  tall  as  the 
loftyeft  Trees,  with  Chains  on  their  Feet,  and  Serpents  in 
their  Hands:  In  fine,  they  do  fo  terrify  [134]  the  People, 
that  they  are  forc'd  to  have  recourfe  to  the  Priefts,  for  their 
Exorcifms ;  upon  the  apprehenfion  that  thefe  Apparitions  are 
Souls  come  from  Purgatory  to  this  World,  to  beg  fome  Maffes 
which  are  neceffary  for  their  Tranflation  into  the  Prefence  of 
the  Almighty.  Now,  take  all  thefe  Articles  together,  you 
will  not  think  it  ftrange,  that  we  Burn  'em  without  Mercy, 
purfuant  to  the  Tenor  of  our  Laws. 

Adar'io.  Is  it  poflible,  that  you  believe  fuch  idle  Stories? 
Sure,  you  only  rally  to  fee  what  I  would  anfwer.  Thefe 
Stories  feem  to  be  of  a  piece  with  thofe  I  have  Read  in  the 

*  Books  of  fpeaking  Animals.    Some  of  our  Coureurs 

*jEfob's  . 

de  Bois  Read  thefe  idle  Fictions  every  day  ;   and  I'm 
Fables. 

much  miftaken  if  what  you  now  fpeak  of,  is  not  Writ- 


to  North- America.  565 

ten  in  thefe  Books  :  For,  one  muft  be  a  Fool  that  believes  that 
the  evil  Spirit  is  invefted  with  the  Power  of  coming  upon  the 
Earth ;  fuppofing  it  to  be  true  that  he  is  fuch  as  the  Jefuits 
reprefent  him.  No  Creature  can  fubfift  out  of  its  own  Ele- 
ment :  Fifh  die  when  forc'd  upon  the  Land,  and  Man  expires 
when  under  Water.  How  can  you  imagine  then  that  the 
Devil  can  live  out  of  his  Element,  which  is  Fire?  Befides,  If 
he  could  come  upon  the  Earth,  he  would  do  mifchief  enough 
by  himfelf,  without  imploying  thefe  Sorcerers ;  and  if  he  con- 
vers'd  with  one  Man,  he  would  be  ready  to  converfe  with 
many  others  ;  for  confidering  that  in  your  Country  the  wicked 
out-number  the  good,  every  one  of  you  would  then  turn  Sor- 
cerer, and  fo  all  would  go  to  Deftruclion  together ;  the  World 
would  be  turn'd  upfide  down  ;  and  in  a  word,  a  remedylefs 
Diforder  would  enfue.  Doft  not  thee  know,  my  Brother,  that 
to  credit  fuch  idle  Whims,  is  an  affront  offer'd  to  the  Great 
Spirit;  in  regard  that  it  charges  him  with  Authorifing  [135] 
Mifchief,  and  being  the  direct  Authour  of  all  the  abovemen- 
tion'd  Diforders,  by  fuffering  the  Evil  Spirit  to  turn  out  of 
Hell?  Since  the  Great  Spirit  is  fo  good,  as  you  and  I  are 
fenfible  he  is,  'tis  more  credible  that  he  would  fend  good 
Souls  with  agreeable  Shapes,  to  check  men  for  their  unwar- 
rantable Actions,  and  to  invite  'em  in  an  amicable  way  to  the 
practice  of  Vertue,  by  fetting  forth  the  Felicity  and  Blifs  of 
thofe  Souls  that  are  poffefs'd  of  the  good  Country.  As  for 
the  Souls  that  lye  in  Purgatory  (if  fo  be  that  there's  any  fuch 
place)  I  take  it,  the  Great  Spirit  has  no  occafion  to  be 
intreated  and  pray'd  to  on  their  behalf,  by  thofe  who  have 


566  Some  New  Voyages 

enough  to  do  to  pray  for  themfelves :  Befides,  fince  he  gives 
'em  leave  to  come  to  the  Earth,  he  might  as  well  allow  them 
to  mount  up  to  Heaven.  Upon  the  whole,  my  dear  Brother, 
if  I  thought  you  fpoke  ferioufly  of  thefe  things,  I  mould  truly 
be  apprehenfive  that  you  are  Delirious,  or  have  loft  your 
Senfes.  Certainly,  there  muft  be  fome  more  inflaming  Article 
againfl  thefe  two  Jugglers,  or  elfe  both  your  Laws  and  your 
Judges  are  equally  unreafonable.  If  'twere  true  that  thefe 
mifchievous  Actions  were  actually  committed,  the  Confe- 
quence  I  mould  draw  from  thence,  would  be  this ;  That  fince 
there's  no  fuch  thing  heard  of  among  any  of  the  Nations  of 
Canada,  it  can't  be  otherwife  but  that  the  Evil  Spirit  has  a 
power  over  you  that  he  has  not  over  us.  Upon  this  lay,  we 
are  a  good  People,  and  you  on  the  other  hand  are  perverfe, 
malicious,  and  addicted  to  all  degrees  of  Vice  and  Wicked- 
nefs.  But,  prithee,  let's  make  an  end  of  our  Conferences 
upon  this  Head ;  and  fo  I'll  expect  no  anfwer  to  what  has 
been  faid.  To  come  back  to  your  Laws,  pray  inform  me  how 
it  comes  to  pafs  that  they  fuffer  Women  to  be  Sold  for  Mony 
to  thofe  who  have  [136]  a  mind  to  make  ufe  of  'em?  Why 
do  they  fuffer  thofe  publick  Houfes  where  the  Whores  and 
Bawds  are  in  readynefs  all  the  hours  of  the  day,  to  oblige  all 
forts  of  Perfons  ?  Why  are  fome  allow'd  to  wear  Swords,  in 
order  to  kill  others  that  dare  not  wear  'em  ?  Why  do  not 
they  prohibit  the  Selling  of  Wine  above  a  determin'd  quan- 
tity, or  the  adulterating  of  it  with  I  do  not  know  how  many 
Ingredients,  that  ruin  one's  Health  ?  Do  not  you  fee  the 
Diforders  committed  at  Quebec  by  Drunkards?    You'll  anfwer 


to  TVor^-America.  567 

perhaps,  as  others  have  done  before  you  ;  that  the  Vintner  is 
allow'd  to  Sell  as  much  Goods  as  he  can  put  off,  for  the  main- 
tenance of  himfelf  and  his  Family ;  and  that  he  who  drinks 
the  Wine  ought  to  regulate  his  own  Conduct ;  and  be  mod- 
erate in  that  as  well  as  in  all  other  things.  But  I'll  prove  that 
to  be  impoflible,  for  a  Man  in  drink,  lofes  his  Reafon  before 
he  is  aware,  or  at  leaft  his  Reafon  is  fo  drown'd  that  he  is  not 
capable  of  diftinguifhing  what  he  ought  to  do.  Why  do  not 
your  Laws  reftrain  the  exceffive  Gaming,  that  is  the  fource  of 
a  thoufand  evils?  Fathers  ruin  their  Families  (as  I  faid 
before)  Children  either  Rob  their  Fathers,  or  run  'em  into 
Debt;  the  Wives  and  Daughters  proftitute  themfelves  for 
Mony,  when  they're  reduc'd  to  extremities,  and  have  plaid 
away  their  Cloaths,  and  their  Houfhold  Furniture.  This 
gives  rife  to  difputes,  murders,  enmity,  and  irreconcileable 
hatred.  Thefe  prohibitions,  my  Brother,  would  be  of  no  ufe 
among  the  Hurons ;  but  they  are  very  much  wanted  among 
the  French.  If  by  fuch  methods  you  would  gradually  reform 
the  Diforders  that  Intereft  has  rais'd  amongft  you,  I  mould 
hope  that  one  day  you  might  come  to  live  without  Laws  as  we 
do. 

[137]  Lahontan.  I  acquainted  you  before,  that  our  Laws 
inflicl:  Penalties  on  Gamefters ;  and  provide  Punifhments  for 
Whores  and  Bawds,  and  above  all,  for  Publick  Houfe-Keepers, 
when  diforders  happen  in  their  Houfes.  All  the  difference 
lies  here,  that  our  Cities  are  fo  large  and  populous  that  'tis 
not  eafy  for  the  Judges  to  trace  all  the  Abufes  that  are  com- 
mitted :    But  at  the  fame  time,  they  are   prohibited  by  the 


568  Some  New  Voyages 

Laws,  and  all  poflible  meafures  are  us'd  to  prevent  'em :  In 
one  word,  our  Judges  indeavour  with  fuch  care  and  applica- 
tion to  ftiffle  bad  Cuftoms,  to  eftablifh  a  good  Order  in  all  the 
Branches  of  the  Society,  to  punifh  Vice  and  reward  Vertue; 
this,  I  fay,  they  do  with  fuch  care  and  application,  that  if  you 
could  but  make  off  your  faulty  Prejudices,  and  weigh  narrowly 
the  excellency  of  our  Laws,  you  would  be  oblig'd  to  own  that 
the  French  are  a  juft,  judicious  and  knowing  People,  who  pur- 
fue  the  true  meafures  of  Juftice  and  Reafon  more  than  you  do. 
Adario.  I  would  gladly  embrace  any  opportunity  of  work- 
ing my  felf  into  that  Belief  before  I  die,  for  I  have  a  natural 
affection  for  the  French ;  but  I  am  very  apprehenfive  that  I 
mall  not  meet  with  that  Confolation.  Upon  this  foot,  your 
Judges  ought  to  begin  firft  to  obferve  the  Laws,  that  their 
example  may  influence  others ;  they  ought  to  difcontinue  their 
Oppreflion  of  Widows,  Orphans,  and  poor  Creatures ;  to  give 
difpatch  to  the  Suits  of  Perfons  that  come  an  hundred  Leagues 
off  for  a  Hearing ;  and  in  a  word,  to  form  fuch  Judgments 
of  Caufes  as  the  Great  Spirit  fhall  do.  I  can  never  entertain 
a  good  thought  of  your  Laws,  till  they  leffen  the  Taxes  and 
Duties  that  poor  People  are  conftrain'd  to  pay,  at  a  time  when 
the  Rich  of  all  Stations  pay  nothing  in  proportion  to  their 
Eftates;  till  [138]  you  put  a  ftop  to  the  courfe  of  Drunken- 
nefs  that  fpreads  thro'  our  Villages,  by  prohibiting  the  Coureurs 
de  Bois  to  import  Brandy  among  us.  Then  indeed  I  mall  hope 
that  you'll  compleat  your  Reformation  by  degrees,  that  a 
levelling  of  Eftates  may  gradually  creep  in  among  you ;  and 
that  at  laft  you'll  abhor  that  thing  call'd  Intereft,  which  occa- 


to  North- America.  569 

fions  all  the  Mifchief  that  Europe  groans  under.  When  you 
arrive  at  that  pitch,  you'll  have  neither  Meum  nor  Tuum  to 
difturb  you,  but  live  as  happily  as  the  Hurons.  This  is  enough 
for  one  day:  I  fee  my  Slave  coming  to  acquaint  me  that  I  am 
wanted  in  the  Village.  Farewel,  my  dear  Brother,  till  to 
morrow. 

Lahontan.  I  am  of  the  Opinion,  my  dear  Friend,  that  you 
would  not  have  come  fo  foon  to  my  Apartment,  if  you  had 
not  defign'd  to  purfue  our  laft  Difpute.  As  for  my  part,  I 
declare  I  will  not  enter  the  lifts  farther  with  you,  upon  the 
confederation  that  you  are  not  capable  to  apprehend  my  Argu- 
ments. You  are  fo  prepoflefs'd  on  the  behalf  of  your  own 
Nation,  fo  ftrongly  byafs'd  to  the  Savage  Cuftoms,  and  fo 
little  fond  of  a  due  enquiry  into  ours  ;  that  I  fhall  not  daign 
to  kill  both  my  Body  and  my  Soul,  in  endeavouring  to  make 
you  fenfible  of  the  ignorance  and  mifery  that  the  Hurons  have 
always  liv'd  in.  Thou  knoweft  I  am  thy  Friend ;  and  fo  I 
have  no  other  view,  but  to  fet  before  thine  eyes  the  Felicity 
that  attends  the  French,  to  the  end  that  thou  and  the  reft  of 
thy  Nation  may  live  as  they  do.  I  told  you,  I  do  not  know 
how  often,  that  you  infift  on  the  Converfation  of  fome  French 
Debauchees,  and  meafure  all  the  reft  by  their  Bufhel.  I  ac- 
quainted you,  that  they  were  punifh'd  for  their  Crimes ;  but 
thefe  reafons  will  not  go  down  with  you  ;  you  obftinately  [139] 
maintain  your  affertion  by  throwing  in  affrontive  anfwers,  as 
if  the  French  were  not  Men.  Upon  the  whole,  I  am  downright 
weary  of  hearing  fuch  poor  ftuff  come  from  the  Mouth  of  a 
Man  that  all  the  Fre7ich  look  upon  as   a  Man  of  excellent 


570  Some  New  Voyages 

Senfe.  The  People  of  thy  Nation  refpect  thee  not  only  for 
thy  Senfe  and  Spirit,  but  for  thy  Experience  and  Valour. 
Thou  art  the  Head  of  the  Warriours,  and  the  Prefident  of 
the  Council ;  and  without  flattery,  I  have  fcarce  met  with  a 
Man  of  a  quicker  apprehenfion  than  thy  felf.  'Tis  upon  this 
confederation,  that  I  pity  thee  with  all  my  heart  for  not  throw- 
ing off  thy  prejudicate  Opinions. 

Adario.  Thou'rt  miftaken,  my  dear  Brother,  in  all  thou 
haft  faid ;  for  I  have  not  form'd  to  my  felf  any  falfe  Idea  of 
your  Religion,  or  of  your  Laws.  The  Example  of  all  the 
French  in  General,  will  ever  oblige  me  to  look  upon  all  their 
Actions  as  unworthy  of  a  Man.  So  that  my  Idea's  are  juft; 
the  prepoffeflion  you  talk  of  is  well  grounded  ;  and  I  am  ready 
to  make  out  all  my  advances.  We  talk'd  of  Religion  and 
Laws,  and  I  did  not  impart  to  you  above  a  quarter  of  what  I 
had  to  fay  upon  that  Head.  You  infift  chiefly  upon  our  way 
of  living,  which  you  take  to  be  Blame-worthy.  The  French  in 
general  take  us  for  Beafts ;  the  Jefuits  Brand  us  for  impious, 
foolifh  and  ignorant  Vagabonds.  And  to  be  even  with  you, 
we  have  the  fame  thoughts  of  you ;  but  with  this  difference, 
that  we  pity  you  without  offering  invectives.  Pray  hear  me, 
my  dear  Brother,  I  fpeak  calmly  and  without  paffion.  The 
more  I  reflect  upon  the  lives  of  the  Europeans,  the  lefs  Wifdom 
and  Happinefs  I  find  among  'em.  Thefe  fix  years  I  have  bent 
my  thoughts  upon  the  State  of  the  Europeans :  But  I  can't 
light  on  any  thing  in  their  Actions  that  is  not  [140]  beneath 
a  Man ;  and  truly  I  think  'tis  impoflible  it  fhould  be  other- 
wife,  fo  long  as  you  ftick  to  the  meafures  of  Meum  and  Tunm. 


to  North- America.  571 

I  affirm  that  what  you  call  Silver  is  the  Devil  of  Devils  ;  the 
Tyrant  of  the  French ;  the  Source  of  all  Evil;  the  Bane  of 
Souls,  and  the  Slaughter-Houfe  of  living  Perfons.  To  pre- 
tend to  live  in  the  Mony  Country,  and  at  the  fame  time  to 
fave  one's  Soul,  is  as  great  an  inconfiftency  as  for  a  Man  to  go 
to  the  bottom  of  a  Lake  to  preferve  his  Life.  This  Mony 
is  the  Father  of  Luxury,  Lafcivioufnefs,  Intrigues,  Tricks, 
Lying,  Treachery,  Falfenefs,  and  in  a  word,  of  all  the  mifchief 
in  the  World.  The  Father  fells  his  Children,  Husbands 
expofe  their  Wives  to  Sale,  Wives  betray  their  Husbands, 
Brethren  kill  one  another,  Friends  are  falfe,  and  all  this  pro- 
ceeds from  Mony.  Confider  this,  and  then  tell  me  if  we  are 
not  in  the  right  of  it,  in  refufing  to  finger,  or  fo  much  as  to 
look  upon  that  curfed  Metal. 

Lahontan.  What !  is  it  poffible  that  you  mould  always 
Reafon  fo  forrily!  Prithee,  do  but  liften  once  in  thy  life  time 
to  what  I  am  going  to  fay.  Doll  not  thou  fee,  my  dear 
Friend,  that  the  Nations  of  Europe  could  not  live  without 
Gold  and  Silver,  or  fome  fuch  precious  thing.  Without  that 
Symbol,  the  Gentlemen,  the  Priefts,  the  Merchants,  and  an 
infinity  of  other  Perfons  who  have  not  Strength  enough  to 
labour  the  Earth,  would  die  for  Hunger.  Upon  that  lay,  our 
Kings  would  be  no  Kings  :  Nay,  what  Soldiers  mould  we  then 
have?  Who  would  then  Work  for  Kings  or  any  body  elfe, 
who  would  run  the  hazard  of  the  Sea,  who  would  make  Arms 
unlefs  'twere  for  himfelf  ?  Believe  me,  this  would  run  us  to 
remedilefs  Ruine,  'twould  turn  Europe  into  a  Chaos,  and  create 
the  moft  difmal  Confufion  that  Imagination  it  felf  can  reach. 


572  Some  New  Voyages 

[141]  Adario.  You  fobb  me  off  very  prettily,  truly,  when 
you  bring  in  your  Gentlemen,  your  Merchants  and  your  Priefts. 
If  you  were  Strangers  to  Meum  and  Tuum,  thofe  diftinctions 
of  Men  would  be  funk ;  a  levelling  equality  would  then  take 
place  among  you  as  it  now  do's  among  the  Hurons.  For  the 
firft  thirty  years  indeed,  after  the  banifhing  of  Intereft,  you 
would  fee  a  ftrange  Defolation ;  thofe  who  are  -only  qualify'd 
to  eat,  drink,  fleep  and  divert  themfelves,  would  languifh  and 
die  ;  but  their  Pofterity  would  be  fit  for  our  way  of  living.  I 
have  fet  forth  again  and  again,  the  qualities  that  make  a  Man 
inwardly  fuch  as  he  ought  to  be  ;  particularly,  Wifdom,  Reafon, 
Equity,  &c.  which  are  courted  by  the  Hurons.  I  have  made 
it  appear  that  the  Notion  of  feparate  Interefts  knocks  all  thefe 
Qualities  in  the  Head,  and  that  a  Man  fway'd  by  Intereft  can't 
be  a  Man  of  Reafon.  As  for  the  outward  Qualifications  of  a 
Man;  he  ought  to  be  expert  in  Marching,  Hunting,  Fifhing, 
Waging  War,  Ranging  the  Forefts,  Building  Hutts  and  Ca- 
nows,  Firing  of  Guns,  Shooting  of  Arrows,  Working  Canows  : 
He  ought  to  be  Indefatigable,  and  able  to  live  on  fhort  Com- 
mons upon  occafion.  In  a  word,  he  ought  to  know  how  to  go 
about  all  the  Exercifes  of  the  Hurons.  Now  in  my  way,  'tis 
the  Perfon  thus  qualify'd  that  I  call  a  Man.  Do  but  confider, 
how  many  Millions  there  are  in  Europe,  who,  if  they  were  left 
thirty  Leagues  off  in  the  Forrefts,  and  provided  with  Fufees 
and  Arrows,  would  be  equally  at  a  lofs,  either  to  Hunt  and 
maintain  themfelves,  or  to  find  their  way  out :  And  yet  you 
fee  we  traverfe  a  hundred  Leagues  of  Forrefts  without  lofing 
our  way,  that  we  kill  Fowl  and  other  Beafts  with  our  Arrows, 


to  iVtfr^-America.  573 

that  we  catch  Fifh  in  all  the  places  where  they  are  to  be  had ; 
that  we  [142]  Dog  both  Men  and  Wild  Beafts  by  their  Foot- 
fteps,  whether  in  Woods  or  in  open  Fields,  in  Summer  or  in 
Winter;  that  we  live  upon  Roots  when  we  lye  before  the 
Gates  of  the  Iroquefe,  that  we  run  like  Hares,  that  we  know 
how  to  ufe  both  the  Axe  and  the  Knife,  and  to  make  a  great 
many  ufeful  things.  Now  fince  we  are  capable  of  fuch  things, 
what  mould  hinder  you  to  do  the  fame,  when  Intereft  is  laid 
afide  ?  Are  not  your  Bodies  as  large,  ftrong  and  brawny 
as  ours  ?  Are  not  your  Artifans  imploy'd  in  harder  and  more 
difficult  Work  than  ours  ?  If  you  liv'd  after  our  manner,  all  of 
you  would  be  equally  Matters ;  your  Riches  would  be  of  the 
fame  Stamp  with  ours,  and  confift  in  the  purchafing  of  Glory 
by  military  Actions,  and  the  taking  of  Slaves ;  for  the  more 
you  took  of  them  the  lefs  occafion  you  would  have  to  Work : 
In  a  word,  you  would  live  as  happily  as  we  do. 

Labontan.  Do  you  place  a  happy  Life,  in  being  oblig'd  to 
lye  under  a  pittiful  Hutt  of  Bark,  to  Sleep  under  four  forry 
Coverlets  of  Beaver  Skins,  to  Eat  nothing  but  what  you  Boil 
and  Roaft,  to  be  Cloath'd  with  Skins,  to  go  a  Beaver  Hunting 
in  the  harfheft  Seafon  of  the  Year,  to  run  a  hundred  Leagues 
on  Foot  in  purfuit  of  the  Iroquefe,  thro'  Marfhes  and  thick 
Woods,  the  Trees  of  which  are  cut  down  fo  as  to  render  'em 
inacceffible !  Do  you  think  your  felves  happy  when  you  ven- 
ture out  in  little  Canows,  and  run  the  rifque  of  being  drown'd 
every  foot  in  your  Voyages  upon  the  Great  Lakes ;  when  you 
lye  upon  the  ground  with  the  Heavens  for  your  Canopy, 
upon  approaching  to  the  Villages  of  your  Enemies  ;   when 


574  Some  New  Voyages 

you  run  with  full  Speed,  both  days  and  nights  without  eating 
or  drinking,  as  being  purfued  by  your  Enemies ;  when  you 
are  fure  of  being  reduc'd  to  the  laft  extremity,  if  [143]  the 
Coureurs  de  Bois  did  not  out  of  Friendship,  Charity  and  Com- 
miferation,  fupply  you  with  Fire-Arms,  Powder,  Lead,  Thread 
for  Nets,  Axes,  Knives,  Needles,  Awls,  Fifhing-Hooks,  Ket- 
tles, and  feveral  other  Commodities? 

Adar'to.  Very  fine,  come,  don't  let's  go  fo  faff ;  the  day  is 
long,  and  we  may  talk  one  after  the  other  at  our  own  leifure. 
It  feems  you  take  all  thefe  things  to  be  great  hardfhips ;  and 
indeed  I  own  they  would  be  fuch  to  the  French,  who  like 
Beafts,  love  only  to  eat  and  to  drink,  and  have  been  brought 
up  to  Softnefs  and  Effeminacy.  Prithee,  tell  me  what  differ- 
ence there  is  between  lying  in  a  good  Hutt,  and  lying  in  a 
Palace ;  between  Sleeping  under  a  Cover  of  Beaver-Skins,  and 
Sleeping  under  a  Quilt  between  two  Sheets ;  between  Eating 
Boil'd  and  Roaft  Meat,  and  feeding  upon  dirty  Pies,  Ragou's, 
&c.  drefs'd  by  your  greafy  Scullions  ?  Are  we  liable  to  more 
Diforders  and  Sickneffes  than  the  French,  who  are  accommo- 
dated with  thefe  Palaces,  Beds  and  Cooks?  But  after  all, 
how  many  are  there  in  France  that  lye  upon  Straw  in  Garrets 
where  the  Rain  comes  in  on  all  hands,  and  that  are  hard  put 
to't  to  find  Victuals  and  Drink?  I  have  been  in  France,  and 
fpeak  from  what  I  have  feen  with  my  Eyes.  You  rally  with- 
out reafon,  upon  our  Cloaths  made  of  Skins,  for  they  are 
warmer,  and  keep  out  the  Rain  better  than  your  Cloth; 
befides,  they  are  not  fo  ridiculoufly  made  as  your  Garments, 


to  TVor^-America.  575 

which  have  more  Stuff  in  their  Pockets  and  Skirts,  than  in 
the  Body  of  the  Garment.  As  for  our  Beaver-Hunting,  you 
take  it  to  be  a  terrible  thing ;  while  it  affords  us  all  manner 
of  pleafure  and  diverfion  ;  and  at  the  fame  time,  procures  us 
all  forts  of  Commodities  in  exchange  for  the  Skins.  Befides, 
our  Slaves  take  all  the  Drudgery  off  our  hands,  (if  fo  be 
[144]  that  you  will  have  it  to  be  drudgery.)  You  know  very 
well  that  Hunting  is  the  moft  agreeable  Diverfion  we  have ; 
but  the  Beaver-Hunting  being  fo  very  pleafant,  we  prefer  it 
to  all  the  other  forts.  You  fay,  we  have  a  troublefome  and 
tedious  way  of  waging  War ;  and  indeed  I  muff  own  that  a 
French  Man  would  not  be  able  to  bear  it,  upon  the  account 
that  you  are  not  accuftom'd  to  fuch  long  Voyages  on  Foot ; 
but  thefe  Excurfions  do  not  fatigue  us  in  the  leaft,  and  'twere 
to  be  wiftVd  for  the  good  of  Canada,  that  you  were  poffefs'd 
of  the  fame  Talent ;  for  if  you  were,  the  Iroquefe  would  not 
Cut  your  Throats  in  the  midft  of  your  own  Habitations,  as 
they  do  now  every  day.  You  infift  likewife  on  the  rifque  we 
run  in  our  little  Canows,  as  an  inftance  of  our  Mifery ;  and 
with  reference  to  that  Point,  'tis  true  that  fometimes  we  can- 
not difpenfe  with  the  ufe  of  Canows,  becaufe  we  are  Strangers 
to  the  Art  of  Building  larger  Veffels  ;  but  after  all,  your  great 
Veffels  are  liable  to  be  caft  away  as  well  as  our  Canows.  'Tis 
likewife  true,  that  we  lye  flat  upon  the  open  ground  when  we 
approach  to  the  Villages  of  our  Enemies ;  but  'tis  equally 
true  that  the  Soldiers  in  France  are  not  fo  well  accommodated 
as  your  Men  are  here,  and  that  they  are  oftentimes  forc'd  to 


576  Some  New  Voyages 

lye  in  Marfhes  and  Ditches,  where  they  are  expos'd  to  the 
Rain  and  Wind.  You  object  farther,  that  we  betake  our 
felves  to  a  fpeedy  Flight ;  and  pray  what  can  be  more  natural 
than  to  flye  when  the  number  of  our  Enemies  is  triple  to 
ours.  The  Fatigue  indeed  of  running  night  and  day  without 
Eating  and  Drinking,  is  terrible ;  but  we  had  better  undergo 
it  than  become  Slaves.  I  am  apt  to  believe  that  fuch  extrem- 
ities are  matter  of  Horrour  to  the  Europeans,  but  we  look 
upon  'em  as  in  a  manner,  nothing.  [145]  You  conclude,  in 
pretending  that  the  French  prevent  our  Mifery  by  taking  pity 
of  us.  But  pray  confider  how  our  Anceftors  liv'd  an  hundred 
years  ago :  They  liv'd  as  well  without  your  Commodities  as 
we  do  with  'em ;  for  inftead  of  your  Fire-Locks,  Powder  and 
Shot,  they  made  ufe  of  Bows  and  Arrows,  as  we  do  to  this 
day :  They  made  Nets  of  the  Thread  of  the  Barks  of  Trees, 
Axes  of  Stone ;  Knives,  Needles  and  Awls  of  Stag  or  Elk- 
Bones  ;  and  fupply'd  the  room  of  Kettles  with  Earthen  Pots. 
Now,  fince  our  Anceftors  liv'd  without  thefe  Commodities  for 
fo  many  Ages ;  I  am  of  the  Opinion,  we  could  difpenfe  with 
'em  eafyer  than  the  French  could  with  our  Beaver  Skins ;  for 
which,  by  a  mighty  piece  of  Friendfhip,  they  give  us  in  exchange 
Fufees,  that  burft  and  Lame  many  of  our  Warriors,  Axes  that 
break  in  the  cutting  of  a  Shrub,  Knives  that  turn  Blunt,  and 
lofe  their  Edge  in  the  cutting  of  a  Citron ;  Thread  which  is 
half  Rotten,  and  fo  very  bad  that  our  Nets  are  worn  out  as 
foon  as  they  are  made ;  and  Kettles  fo  thin  and  flight,  that 
the  very  weight  of  Water  makes  the  Bottoms  fall  out.    This, 


to  TVtf/t/6-America.  577 

my  dear  Brother,  is  the  anfwer  I  had  to  give  to  your  Reflex- 
ions upon  the  Mifery  of  the  Hurons.1 

Labontan.  'Tis  well ;  I  find  you  would  have  me  to  believe 
that  the  Hurons  are  infenfible  of  their  Fatigue  and  Labour; 
and  being  bred  up  to  Poverty  and  Hardfhips,  have  another 
notion  of  'em  than  we  have.  This  may  do  with  thofe  who 
have  never  ftir'd  out  of  their  own  Country,  and  confequently 
have  no  Idea  of  a  better  Life  than  their  own ;  who  having 
never  vifited  our  Cities  and  Towns,  fancy  that  we  live  juft  as 
they  do.  But  as  for  thee,  who  haft  feen  France,  Quebec  and 
New-England,  methinks  thy  judgment  and  relifh  of  things  are 
too  much  of  the  Savage  [146]  Strain  ;  whilft  thou  prefers  the 
Condition  of  the  Hurons  to  that  of  the  Europeans.  Can  there 
be  a  more  agreeable  and  delightful  Life  in  the  World,  than 
that  of  an  infinity  of  rich  Men,  who  want  for  nothing  ?  They 
have  fine  Coaches,  Stately  Houfes  adorn'd  with  Rich  Hang- 
ings and  Magnificent  Pictures,  Sweet  Gardens  replenifh'd 
with  all  forts  of  Fruit,  Parks  Stock'd  with  all  forts  of  Animals, 
Horfes  and  Hounds  and  good  ftore  of  Mony,  which  enables 
'em  to  keep  a  Sumptuous  Table,  to  frequent  the  Play-Houfes, 
to  Game  freely,  and  to  difpofe  handfomely  of  their  Children. 
Thefe  happy  Men  are  ador'd  by  their  Dependants ;  and  you 


1  As  the  result  of  contact  with  Europeans,  there  was  soon  noticeable  a  great  changf 
in  Indian  customs  and  mode  of  living.  The  introduction  from  Europe  of  iron  im- 
plements, fire-arms,  utensils,  clothing,  and  ornaments,  profoundly  affected  our  abori- 
gines, and  rendered  them  thenceforth  dependent  upon  traders  for  the  very  means  of 
subsistence.  Lahontan  has  here  put  into  the  mouth  of  Adario  an  illuminating  although 
satirical  reference  to  the  process  by  which  the  American  Indians  were  quickly  con- 
verted by  the  fur-traders  from  a  self-reliant  people  into  a  dependent  class. —  Ed. 
37 


578  Some  New  Voyages 

have  feen  with  your  own  eyes  our  Princes,  Dukes,  Marefhals  of 
France,  Prelates,  and  a  Million  of  perfons  of  all  Stations,  who 
want  for  nothing,  and  live  like  Kings,  and  who  never  call  to 
mind  that  they  have  liv'd,  till  fuch  time  as  Death  alarms  'em. 
Adario.  If  I  had  not  been  particularly  inform'd  of  the 
State  of  France,  and  let  into  the  knowledge  of  all  the  Circum- 
ftances  of  that  People,  by  my  Voyage  to  Paris ;  I  might  have 
been  Blinded  by  the  outward  appearances  of  Felicity  that  you 
fet  forth :  But  I  know  that  your  Prince,  your  Duke,  your 
Marefhal,  and  your  Prelate  are  far  from  being  happy  upon 
the  Compaarifon  with  the  Hurons,  who  know  no  other  happi- 
nefs  than  that  of  Liberty  and  Tranquility  of  Mind  :  For  your 
great  Lords  hate  one  another  in  their  Hearts ;  they  forfeit 
their  Sleep,  and  neglect  even  Eating  and  Drinking,  in  making 
their  Court  to  the  King,  and  undermining  their  Enemies; 
they  offer  fuch  Violence  to  Nature  in  diffembling,  difguifing 
and  bearing  things,  that  the  Torture  of  their  Soul  leaves  all 
Expreflion  far  behind  it.  Is  all  this  nothing  in  your  way  ? 
Do  you  think  it  fuch  a  trifling  matter  to  have  fifty  [147] 
Serpents  in  your  Bofom?  Had  not  they  better  throw  their 
Coaches,  their  Palaces  and  their  Finery,  into  the  River,  than 
to  fpend  their  life  time  in  a  continued  Series  of  Martyrdom? 
Were  I  in  their  place,  I'd  rather  choofe  to  be  a  Huron  with  a 
Naked  Body  and  a  Serene  Mind.  The  Body  is  the  Apart- 
ment in  which  the  Soul  is  lodg'd  ;  and  what  fignifies  it,  for  the 
Cafe  call'd  the  Body,  to  be  fet  off  with  Gold  Trappings,  or 
fpread  out  in  a  Coach,  or  planted  before  a  Sumptuous  Table, 


to  iVor^-America.  579 

while  the  Soul  Galls  and  Tortures  it  ?  The  great  Lords,  that 
you  call  Happy,  lie  expos'd  to  Difgrace  from  the  King,  to  the 
detraction  of  a  thoufand  forts  of  Perfons,  to  the  lofs  of  their 
Places,  to  the  Contempt  of  their  Fellow  Courtiers ;  and  in  a 
word,  their  foft  Life  is  thwarted  by  Ambition,  Pride,  Pre- 
emption and  Envy.  They  are  Slaves  to  their  Paffions,  and 
to  their  King,  who  is  the  only  French  Man  that  can  be  call'd 
Happy,  with  refpect  to  that  adorable  Liberty  which  he  alone 
enjoys.  There's  a  thoufand  of  us  in  one  Village,  and  you  fee 
that  we  love  one  another  like  Brethren  ;  that  whatever  any 
one  has  is  at  his  Neighbour's  Service ;  that  our  Generals  and 
Prefidents  of  the  Council  have  not  more  Power  than  any  other 
Huron  ;  that  Detraction  and  Quarreling  were  never  heard  of 
among  us ;  and  in  fine,  that  every  one  is  his  own  Mafter,  and 
do's  what  he  pleafes,  without  being  accountable  to  another, 
or  cenfur'd  by  his  Neighbour.  This,  my  dear  Brother,  is  the 
difference  between  us  and  your  Princes,  Dukes,  &c.  And  if 
thofe  great  Men  are  fo  Unhappy,  by  confequence,  thofe  of 
inferiour  Stations  muft  have  a  greater  fhare  of  Trouble  and 
perplexing  Cares. 

[148]  Lahontan.  You  muft  know  that  as  your  Hurons 
who  are  brought  up  in  the  way  of  Fatigue  and  Mifery,  have 
no  mind  to  be  rid  of  it ;  fo  thefe  great  Lords  being  inur'd 
from  their  infancy  to  ambition,  care,  &c.  can't  live  without  it. 
As  Happinefs  lies  in  the  imagination,  fo  they  feed  themfelves 
with  Vanity,  and  in  their  hearts  think  themfelves  as  good  as 
the  King.     That  Tranquility  of  mind  that  the  Hurons  enjoy, 


580  Some  New  Voyages 

never  car'd  for  crofting  over  to  France,  for  fear  of  being  con- 
fin'd  to  the  little  Religious  Houfes.  Tranquility  of  mind 
paffes  in  France  for  the  Character  of  a  Fool,  of  a  fenfelefs, 
carelefs  Fellow.  To  be  happy,  one  muft  always  have  fome- 
what  in  his  view  that  feeds  his  Wifhes.  He  that  confines  his 
Wifhes  to  what  he  enjoys,  muft  be  a  Huron,  which  none  will 
deflre  to  be,  if  he  considers  that  Life  would  be  a  Scene  of 
Uneafynefs,  if  our  Mind  did  not  direct  us  every  minute  to 
defire  fomewhat  that  we  are  not  yet  poffefs'd  of ;  and  'tis  this 
that  makes  a  Life  happy,  provided  the  means  imploy'd  in  the 
profecution  of  fuch  Wifhes  are  lawful  and  warrantable. 

Adario.  Is  not  that  Burying  a  Man  alive;  to  rack  his 
Mind  without  intermiffion  in  the  acquifition  of  Riches  and 
Honour,  which  cloy  us  as  foon  as  obtain'd ;  to  infeeble  and 
wafte  his  Body,  and  to  expofe  his  Life  in  the  forming  of 
Enterprifes,  that  for  the  raoft  part  prove  Abortive?  As  for 
your  Allegation,  that  thefe  great  Lords  are  bred  from  their 
Infancy  to  Ambition  and  Care,  as  we  are  to  Labour  and 
Fatigue ;  I  muft  fay,  'tis  a  fine  Comparifon  for  a  Man  that 
can  Read  and  Write.  Tell  me,  prithee,  if  the  repofe  of  the 
Mind  and  the  exercife  of  the  Body  are  not  the  neceffary 
Inftruments  of  Health,  if  the  toiling  of  the  Mind  and  the  reft 
of  the  Body  are  not  the  means  to  deftroy  it  ?  What  have  we 
[149]  in  the  World  that's  dearer  to  us  than  our  Lives,  and 
ought  not  we  to  take  the  beft  meafures  to  preferve  'em?  The 
French  murder  their  Health  by  a  thoufand  different  means, 
and  we  preferve  ours  till  our  Bodies  are  worn  out,  our  Souls 


to  North- America.  581 

being  fo  far  free  from  Paflions,  that  they  can't  alter  or  difturb 
our  Bodies.  And  after  all,  you  infinuate  that  the  French  haften 
the  Moment  of  their  Death  by  lawful  means:  A  very  pretty 
conclufion  indeed,  and  fuch  as  deferves  to  be  took  notice  of. 
Believe  me,  my  dear  Brother,  'tis  thy  Intereft  to  turn  Huron, 
in  order  to  prolong  thy  life.  Thou  (halt  drink,  eat,  fleep,  and 
Hunt  with  all  the  eafe  that  can  be;  thou  fhalt  be  free'd  from 
the  Paffions  that  Tyrannife  over  the  French  ;  thou  fhalt  have 
no  occafion  for  Gold  or  Silver  to  make  thee  happy;  thou  fhalt 
not  fear  Robbers,  Affaflins  or  Falfe  Witnefles ;  and  if  thou 
haft  a  mind  to  be  King  of  all  the  World,  why,  thou  fhalt  have 
nothing  to  do  but  to  think  that  thou  art  fo. 

Lahontan.  You  cannot  expect  I  fhould  comply  with  your 
demand,  without  thinking  that  I  have  been  guilty  of  fuch 
Crimes  in  France,  that  I  can't  return  without  running  the 
rifque  of  being  Burnt :  For  after  all,  I  can't  imagine  a  more 
unaccountable  Metamorphofis,  than  that  of  a  French  Man  into  a 
Huron.  How  d'ye  think  I  could  undergo  the  Fatigues  we 
talk'd  of  but  now?  D'ye  think  I  could  have  the  patience  to 
hear  the  Childifh  Propofals  of  your  Ancient  and  your  Young 
Men,  without  taking  them  up  ?  Is  it  feafible  that  I  could  live 
upon  Broth,  Bread,  Indian  Corn,  Roaft  Meat  and  Boil'd, 
without  either  Pepper  or  Salt?  Could  I  brook  the  Larding 
of  my  Face  like  a  Fool,  with  twenty  forts  of  Colours?  What 
Spirit  muft  I  be  of,  if  I  drink  nothing  but  Mapple-Water, 
and  go  ftark  Naked  all  the  Summer,  [150]  and  eat  out  of 
nothing  but  Wooden  Dimes  ?     Your  Meals  would  never  go 


582  Some  New  Voyages 

down  with  me,  fince  two  or  three  hundred  Perfons  muft  Dance 
for  two  or  three  hours  before  and  after.  I  can't  live  with  an 
uncivilis'd  fort  of  People,  who  know  no  other  Compliment 
than,  /  honour  you.  No,  no ;  my  dear  Adark,  'tis  impoffible 
for  a  French-Man  to  turn  Huron  ^  but  a  Huron  may  eafily  become 
a  French-Man. 

A  dark.  At  that  rate  you  prefer  Slavery  to  Liberty.  But 
'tis  no  Surprifal  to  me,  after  what  I  have  heard  you  maintain: 
Tho  after  all,  if  you  happen'd  to  enter  into  your  own  Breaft, 
and  to  throw  off  your  prepoffeflion  with  regard  to  the  Cuf- 
toms  and  Humours  of  the  French  Nation  ;  I  cannot  fee  that 
the  Objections  you've  now  Started,  are  of  fuch  Moment  as  to 
keep  you  from  falling  into  our  way  of  living.  What  a  mighty 
difficulty  you  meet  with  in  bringing  your  felf  to  approve  of 
our  old  Men's  Counfel,  and  our  young  Men's  Projects !  Are 
not  you  equally  gravell'd,  when  the  Jefuits  and  your  Superiours 
make  impertinent  demands  ?  Why  would  not  you  choofe  to 
live  upon  the  Broth  of  all  forts  of  good  and  fubftantial  Meat? 
Our  Partridges,  Turkeys,  Hares,  Ducks,  and  Roe-Bucks ;  do 
not  they  eat  well  when  they're  Roafted  or  Boil'd?  What  fig- 
nifies  your  Pepper,  your  Salt,  and  a  thoufand  other  Spices, 
unlefs  it  be  to  murder  your  Health  ?  Try  our  way  of  living 
but  one  fort-night,  and  then  you'll  long  for  no  fuch  doings. 
What  harm  can  you  fear  from  the  Painting  of  your  Face  with 
Colours?  You  dawb  your  Hair  with  Powder  and  Effence, 
and  even  your  Cloaths  are  fprinkled  with  the  fame :  Nay,  I 
have  feen  French  Men  that  had  Muftaches  like  Cats,  cover'd 


to  North- America.  583 

o'er  with  Wax.  As  for  the  Map  pie- Water,  'tis  fweet,  healthy, 
well-tafted,  and  friendly  to  the  Stomach  :  [151]  And  I've  feen 
you  drink  of  it  oftner  than  once  or  twice  :  Whereas  Wine  and 
Brandy  deftroy  the  natural  Heat,  pall  the  Stomach,  inflame 
the  Blood,  Intoxicate,  and  create  a  thoufand  Diforders.  And 
pray  what  harm  would  it  do  ye,  to  go  Naked  in  warm  Weather? 
Befides,  we  are  not  fo  ftark  Naked,  but  that  we  are  cover'd 
behind  and  before.  'Tis  better  to  go  Naked,  than  to  toil 
under  an  everlafting  Sweat,  and  under  a  load  of  Cloaths  heap'd 
up  one  above  another.  Where's  the  uneafynefs  of  Eating, 
Singing,  and  Dancing  in  good  Company?  Had  not  you 
better  do  fo  than  fit  at  Table  moping  by  your  felf,  or  in  the 
Company  of  thofe  that  you  never  faw  or  knew  before  ?  All 
the  hardfhip  then,  that  you  can  complain  of,  lies  in  converfing 
with  an  unciviliz'd  People,  and  being  robb'd  of  the  Pagean- 
try of  Compliments.  This  you  take  to  be  a  fad  Affliction, 
tho'  at  the  bottom  'tis  far  from  being  fuch.  Tell  me,  prithee; 
do's  not  Civility  confift  in  Decency  and  an  affable  Carriage? 
And  what  is  Decency?  Is  it  not  an  everlafting  Rack,  and  a 
tyrefome  Affectation  difplay'd  in  Words,  Cloaths  and  Coun- 
tenance ?  And  why  would  you  Court  a  Quality  that  gives  you 
fo  much  trouble?  As  for  Affability;  I  prefume  it  lyes  in 
giving  People  to  know  our  readynefs  to  ferve  'em,  by  Careffes 
and  other  outward  Marks ;  As  when  you  fay  every  turn,  Sir, 
I'm  your  humble  Servant,  you  may  difpofe  of  me  as  you  pleafe.  Now, 
let's  but  confider  to  what  purpofe  all  thefe  Words  are  fpoke ; 
for  what  end  muft  we  lie  upon  all  occafions,  and  fpeak  other- 


584  Some  New  Voyages 

wife  than  we  think?  Had  not  you  better  fpeak  after  this 
fafhion ;  Ho!  art  thou  there,  thou'rt  welcome,  for  I  honour  thee? 
Is  not  it  an  ugly  fhow,  to  bend  one's  Body  half  a  fcore  times, 
to  lower  one's  hand  to  the  ground,  and  to  fay  every  moment, 
/  ask  your  Pardon?  Be  [152]  it  known  to  thee,  my  dear 
Brother,  that  this  Submiffion  alone  would  be  enough  to  un- 
hinge me  quite,  as  to  your  way  of  living.  You've  afferted 
that  a  Huron  may  eafily  turn  French ;  but  believe  me,  he'll 
meet  with  other  difficulties  in  the  way  of  his  Converfion  than 
thofe  you  fpeak  of.  For  fuppofing  I  were  to  turn  French  out 
of  hand,  I  muft  begin  with  a  complyance  to  Chriftianity,  which 
is  a  Point  that  you  and  I  talk'd  enough  of  three  days  ago.  In 
order  to  the  fame  end,  I  muft  get  my  felf  Shav'd  every  three 
days,  for  in  all  appearance  I  mould  no  fooner  profefs  Galli- 
cifm,  than  I  mould  become  rough  and  hairy  like  a  Beaft :  And 
this  inconvenience  fhocks  me  extreamly:  Sure  'tis  much  better 
to  be  Beardlefs  and  Hairlefs ;  and  I'm  equally  fure  you  never 
faw  a  rough  Savage.  How  d'ye  think  it  would  agree  with  me 
to  fpend  two  hours  in  DrefTing  or  Shifting  my  felf,  to  put  on 
a  Blue  Sute  and  Red  Stockins,  with  a  Black  Hat  and  a  White 
Feather,  befides  colour'd  Ribbands  ?  Such  Rigging  would 
make  me  look  upon  my  felf  as  a  Fool.  How  could  I  conde- 
fcend  to  Sing  in  the  Streets,  to  Dance  before  a  Looking-Glafs, 
to  tofs  my  Wigg  fometimes  before  and  fometimes  behind  me  ? 
I  could  not  ftoop  fo  as  to  make  my  Honours,  and  fall  down 
before  a  parcel  of  Sawcy  Fools,  that  are  intitled  to  no  other 
Merit  than  that  of  their  Birth  and  Fortune.  D'ye  think  that  I 
could  fee  the  Indigent  languifh  and  pine  away,  without  giving 


to  iVor^-America.  585 

'em  all  I  had  ?     How  could  I  wear  a  Sword  without  attacking 

a  Company  of  Profligate  Men  who  throw  into  the  Gallys  an 

inanity  of  poor  Strangers,  (*)  that     ,  _  ^ 

.    .      ,,  i>     ,  ,  *Tbe  Jlgerines,  Tripolins, 

never    injur  d    any    Body,    and    are    Moors,  Turks,  kc.  who  are 

carried,   in    a   woful    Condition,   out     taken  in  the  Mediterranean, 

of  their  Native   Country,  to  Curfe    and  are  fent  to  Marfeilles 

in  the  [153]  midft  of  their  Chains,    t0  the  Galleys' 

their  Fathers  and  Mothers,  their  Birth,  and  even  the  Great 

Spirit.     Thus  'tis  that  the  Iroquefe  languifh,  who  were  fent  to 

France  fome  two  years  ago.1     Can  you  imagine  that  I  would 

fpeak  ill  of   my  Friends,   carefs   my  Enemies,  contemn  the 

Miferable,  honour  the  Wicked,  and  enter  into  Dealings  with 

'em ;  that  I  would  triumph  o'er  my  Neighbour's  Misfortunes, 

and  praife  a  naughty  Man  ;  that  I  would  act  the  part  of  the 

Envious,   the  Traitours,  the    Flatterers,   the   Inconftant,   the 

Liars,  the  Proud,  the  Avaricious,  the  Selfifh,  the  Taletellers, 

and  all  your  double  Minded  Folks  ?     D'ye  think  it  poffible 

for  me  to  be  fo  indifcreet  as  to  boaft  at  once  of  what  I  have 

done,  and  what  I  have  not  done  ;  to  be  fo  mean  as  to  crawl 

like  an  Adder  at  the  feet  of  a  Lord,  that  orders  his  Servants 

to  deny  him ;  and  to  take  a  Refufal  tamely  ?     No,  my  dear 

Brother,  no ;  I  can't  brook  the  Character  of  a  French  Man ;  I 

had  rather  continue  what  I  am  than  pafs  my  Life  in  thefe 

Chains.     Is  it  poffible  that  our  Liberty  do's  not  Charm  you? 

Can  you  live  an  eafier  life  than  what  you  may  have  in  our  way? 

When  thou  comeft  to  vifit  me  in  my  Hutt,  do  not  my  Wife 

and  my  Daughters  withdraw  and  leave  thee  alone  with  me,  that 

1  For  this  incident,  and  its  effect  upon  the  colony,  see  pp.  122-124,  ante. —  Ed, 


586  Some  New  Voyages 

our  Converfation  may  fuffer  no  Interruption?  In  like  man- 
ner, when  thou  mean'ft  to  pay  a  Vifit  to  my  Wife  or  my 
Daughters,  are  not  thou  left  alone  with  the  party  that  thou 
comeft  to  See  ?  Are  not  you  welcome  to  Command  any  Hutt 
in  the  Village,  and  to  call  for  any  thing  of  Eatables  that  you 
like  beft?  Did  ever  a  Huron  refufe  another,  either  the  whole 
or  part  of  what  he  had  catch'd  at  Hunting  or  Fifhing?  Do 
not  we  make  dividends  of  our  Beaver-Skins,  in  order  to  fupply 
thofe  who  have  not  enough  to  purchafe  fuch  Commodities  as 
they  have  occafion  for?  [154]  Do  not  we  obferve  the  fame 
Method  in  the  diftribution  of  our  Corn,  to  fuch  as  have  not 
fufficient  Crops  upon  their  Fields  for  the  maintenance  of  their 
Families?  If  any  one  of  us  have  a  mind  to  Build  a  Canow  or 
a  Hutt,  we  all  fend  our  Slaves  to  forward  the  Work,  without 
being  ask'd.  This  is  a  quite  different  way  of  living  from  that 
of  the  Europeans,  who  would  Sue  their  neareft  Relations  for  an 
Ox  or  a  Horfe.  If  the  European  Father  asks  Mony  of  his 
Son,  or  the  Son  of  the  Father,  he  replys  he  has  none.  If  of 
two  French  Men  who  have  liv'd  twenty  years  together,  and  eat 
and  drink  at  one  Table  every  day ;  if  of  thefe  two  French 
Men,  I  fay,  one  mould  ask  the  other  for  Mony,  the  anfwer  is, 
there's  none  to  be  had.  If  a  poor  Wretch  that  goes  naked  in 
the  Streets,  and  is  ready  to  dye  with  Hunger  and  Hardfhips : 
does  but  ask  a  rich  Man  for  a  Farthing,  his  anfwer  is,  }Tis  not 
for  him.  Now  fince  all  this  is  true,  how  can  you  have  the  pre- 
emption to  claim  a  free  accefs  to  the  Country  of  the  Great 
Spirit?  Sure,  there's  not  a  Man  upon  Earth  that  does  not 
know,  that  Evil  is  contrary  to  Nature,  and  that  he  was  not 


to  iVor^-America.  587 

Created  to  do  Mifchief.  What  hopes  then  can  a  Chriftian 
have  at  his  Death,  that  never  did  a  good  Action  in  his  Life 
time.  He  either  muft  believe  that  the  Soul  dies  with  the  Body 
(tho'  there's  none  of  you  that  owns  that  Opinion)  or  elfe 
fuppofing  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul,  and  fuppofing  your 
Tenents  of  Hell,  and  of  the  Sins  that  waft  Sinners  to  that 
Region,  to  be  juft  and  true,  your  Souls  will  have  a  hot  time 
of  it. 

Lahontan.  D'ye  hear,  Adario  f  I  find  'tis  needlefs  for  us 
to  Reafon  longer  upon  thefe  Heads;  for  all  the  Arguments 
you  offer  have  nothing  of  Solidity  in  'em.  I  have  told  thee  a 
hundred  times,  that  the  inftance  of  a  handful  of  wicked  [155] 
Men  concludes  nothing  upon  the  whole :  You  fancy  that 
every  European  has  his  particular  Vice,  whether  known  or  un- 
known ;  and  I  may  preach  the  contrary  to  you  till  to  Morrow 
Morning  and  not  Convince  you  when  I  have  done.  You  make 
no  difference  between  a  Scoundrel  and  a  Man  of  Honour  ;  and 
fo  I  may  talk  to  you  ten  Years  together  and  not  unhinge  you 
of  the  bad  opinion  you  have  of  our  Religion,  our  Laws,  and 
our  Cuftoms.  I  would  give  a  hundred  Beaver  Skins  that  you 
could  Read  and  Write  like  a  Frenchman.  Had  you  that 
Qualification,  you  would  not  fo  fhamefully  contemn  the  happy 
Condition  of  the  Europeans.  We  have  had  in  France  fome 
Chinefe  and  Siamefe  who  came  from  the  remoter!:  parts  of  the 
World,  and  were  in  every  refpect  more  averfe  to  our  Cuftoms 
than  the  Hurons,  and  yet  could  not  but  admire  our  way  of 
Living.  For  my  part,  I  proteft  I  can't  conceive  the  ground  of 
your  Obftinacy. 


588  Some  New  Voyages 

Adario,  All  thefe  People  have  as  crooked  Minds  as  they 
have  deform'd  Bodies.  I  have  feen  fome  of  the  Ambaffadors 
from  the  Nations  you  fpeak  of,  and  the  Jefuits  at  Paris  gave 
me  fome  account  of  their  Country.  They  obferve  a  divifion 
of  Property  as  well  as  the  French;  and  forafmuch  as  they 
are  more  brutifh  and  more  wedded  to  their  Intereft  than  the 
French,  we  muft  not  think  it  ftrange  that  they  approv'd  of 
the  Cuftoms  and  Manners  of  a  People  who  treated  'em  with 
all  the  meafures  of  Frendfhip,  and  made  'em  Prefents.  You 
muft  not  think  that  the  Hurons  will  take  their  Meafures  from 
them.  You  ought  not  to  take  Exceptions  at  any  thing  that 
I  have  prov'd ;  for  I  do  not  defpife  the  Europeans,  tho'  indeed 
I  can't  but  pity  'em.  You  fay  well  in  alledging  that  I  place 
no  difference  between  a  Rogue  and  what  you  call  a  Man  of 
[156]  Honour.  My  Apprehenfion  indeed  is  flat  enough; 
but  for  a  long  time  I  have  Convers'd  with  the  French  on 
purpofe  to  know  what  they  mean  by  their  Man  of  Honour. 
To  be  fure  the  Word  can't  be  apply'd  to  a  Huron,  who  is 
a  Stranger  to  Silver,  fince  a  moneylefs  Man  is  no  Man  of 
Honour  in  your  way.  'Twere  an  eafie  matter  to  make  my 
Slave  a  Man  of  Honour,  by  carrying  him  to  Paris,  and  fur- 
nifhing  him  with  a  hundred  Packs  of  Beaver  Skins,  to  anfwer 
the  charge  of  a  Coach  and  ten  or  twelve  Footmen.  As  foon 
as  he  appears  in  an  Embroider'd  Suit  with  fuch  a  Retinue, 
he'l  be  Saluted  by  every  one,  and  Introduc'd  to  the  greateft 
Treats,  and  the  higheft  Company :  And  if  he  does  but  regale 
the  Gentlemen,  and  make  Prefents  to  the  Ladies,  he  paffes 
in  courfe  for  a  Man  of  Senfe  and  Merit:    He'l  be  call'd  the 


fie  1  i.;?iv/-  minting  Spoken 
of  in  y  i'o  lette/r. 

/ii-I'.  .r:  i?..  c  Jin  finny  tAttteivJiiicj  .//  AuuJ, 
B    ./,.  ■  /utnUMtn  L,.„.y,nah./yt°n,erl    rn 

V     , ,.,:,..*„,,„..*,„,*, 

i/k- ftor/urse  injmiltfn  ftrinf  upon  $  Canons- 
o^rj,  .yucc  sAxTt-ty  upon  if  utnonv  tAatfty. 
**%.  ..  la  f/uinqtothok*£oi3drvj 
tenon;  of  bar* 
K,  fAfa&ej ptU  toftig/it 
jtf  ifomrnS/ying  nu/,  rA.-ir  Chi/Jrtri 

;    f/tutfoi  jc  tiunC/nicn 

'&.  ' 

•^      tpoo/or/u*/.  /ulU  ,nj,,u</,t,,f,v/u<h  J 


Life* 


I 


f  ft   $£    '  '? 


$ 


34 


$\ 


\f' 


i    fcjti 

*    .    f 


to  North-America.  589 

King  of  the  Hurons,  and  every  one  will  give  out,  that  his 
Country  is  full  of  Gold  Mines,  that  himfelf  is  the  moft 
Puiffant  Prince  in  America,  that  he  is  a  Man  of  Senfe  and 
talks  moft  agreeably  in  Company ;  that  he  is  redoubted  by 
all  his  Neighbours  ;  in  fine,  he'l  be  fuch  a  Man  of  Honour 
as  moft  of  your  French  Footmen  come  to  be  after  they  have 
made  fhift,  by  infamous  and  deteftable  means,  to  pick  up  as 
much  Money  as  will  fetch  that  pompous  Equipage.  Ha ! 
my  dear  Brother,  if  I  could  but  read,  I  could  find  out  a  great 
many  fine  things  that  now  I  do  not  know.  You  fhould  not 
then  get  off  for  hearing  me  mention  the  few  Diforders  that  I 
obferv'd  among  the  Europeans ;  for  I  would  then  mufter  you 
up  a  great  many  more,  whether  in  Wholefale  or  Retail.  I  do 
not  believe  that  there's  any  one  Vocation  or  Rank  of  Men 
that  would  not  be  found  liable  to  juft  Cenfure,  if  examin'd  by 
one  that  can  Read  and  Write.  And  in  my  Opinion  [157] 
'twere  better  for  the  French  that  they  were  Strangers  to 
Reading  and  Writing :  Every  Day  gives  us  frefh  Inftances 
of  an  infinity  of  Difputes  among  the  Coureurs  de  Bois  upon 
the  account  of  Writings,  which  tend  to  nothing  but  Litigiouf- 
nefs  and  Law  Suits.  One  bit  of  Paper  is  enough  to  ruin  a 
whole  Famity.  With  a  flip  of  a  Letter  a  Woman  betrays 
her  Husband,  and  concerts  ways  to  have  her  turn  ferv'd ;  a 
Mother  fells  her  Daughter,  and  a  Forger  of  Writings  cheats 
whom  he  pleafes.  In  your  Books  which  are  publifh'd  every 
Day,  you  write  Lies  and  impertinent  Stories ;  and  yet  you 
would  fain  have  me  to  Read  and  Write  like  the  French.  No, 
my  dear  Brother,  I  had  rather  live  without  Knowledge,  than 


590  Some  New  Voyages 

to  Read  and  Write  fuch  things  as  the  Hurons  abhor.  We  can 
do  all  our  Bufinefs  with  reference  to  our  Hunting  and  our 
Military  Adventures,  by  the  help  of  our  Hieroglyphicks.  You 
know  very  well  that  the  Characters  which  we  draw  upon  the 
peel'd  Trees  in  our  Paffages,  comprehend  all  the  Particulars 
of  a  Hunting  or  Warlike  Expedition,  and  that  all  who  fee 
thefe  Marks  know  what  they  fignifie.1  Now,  pray,  what  occa- 
flon  have  we  for  more  ?  The  Communion  of  Goods  among 
the  Hurons  fuperfedes  the  ufe  of  Writing.  We  have  no  Pofts 
nor  no  Horfes  in  our  Forrefts  for  Couriers  to  ride  upon  to 
Quebec.  We  make  Peace  and  War  without  Writing,  and  em- 
ploy only  Ambaffadors  that  carry  the  Faith  and  Promife  of 
the  Nation.  Our  Boundaries  are  adjufted  without  Writing : 
And  as  for  the  Sciences  that  you  ftudy,  they  would  be  of  no 
ufe  to  us ;  for,  to  inftance  in  Geography,  we  have  no  mind  to 
puzzle  our  Brains  in  the  reading  of  Books  of  Voyages  that 
contradict  one  another;  and  are  not  in  the  humour  to  abdi- 
cate our  Country,  which  you  know  we  are  [158]  fo  minutely 
acquainted  with,  that  the  leaft  Brook  does  not  fcape  our  Cal- 
culation. Aftronomy  would  be  equally  ufelefs ;  for  we  reckon 
the  Years  by  the  Moons,  and  fo  many  Winters  ftand  for  an 
equal  number  of  Years.  Navigation  would  be  yet  lefs  fervice- 
able,  for  we  have  no  Ships :  And  Fortification  can  bring  us  no 
Advantage,  in  regard  that  a  Fort  of  fingle  Paliffadoes  is  to  us 
a  fufficient  guard  from  the  Arrows  and  the  Surprifes  of  our 
Enemies,  who  are  Strangers  to  Artillery.     In  a  Word,  confid- 


1  See  pp.  512-515,  ante. —  Ed. 


to  North- America.  591 

ering  our  way  of  living,  Writing  can  do  us  no  good.  All  that 
I  value  in  the  whole  Circle  of  your  Sciences,  is  Arithmetick :  I 
can't  but  own  that  that  Science  pleafes  me  infinitely  well,  tho' 
at  the  fame  time  I  am  fenfible  that  thofe  who  are  vers'd  in  it 
are  not  free  from  great  Errors.  There  is  no  Trade  or  Pro- 
feffion  among  the  French  that  I  like,  excepting  that  which  runs 
in  the  way  of  Commerce;  that  indeed  I  look  upon  as  a  Lawful 
Calling,  and  that  which  is  moft  neceffary  for  our  Welfare. 
The  Merchants  are  welcome  to  us  ;  fometimes  they  bring  us 
good  Commodities,  and  fome  of  'em  being  Men  of  Juftice 
and  Probity  are  fatisfied  with  a  moderate  Gain :  They  run 
great  hazards,  they  advance  beforehand,  they  lend,  they  ftay 
for  their  due ;  in  fine,  I  know  many  Dealers  that  have  a  juft 
and  reafonable  Soul,  and  have  oblig'd  our  Nation  very  much. 
But  at  the  fame  time  there  are  others  who  act  with  no  other 
view  than  to  make  an  exorbitant  Profit  upon  Goods  that 
have  a  good  (hew  and  are  worth  but  little,  particularly  Axes, 
Kettles,  Powder,  Guns,  ci?c.  which  we  are  not  qualified  to 
know.  This  makes  it  to  appear,  that  in  all  the  Ranks  and 
Degrees  of  the  Europeans  there's  fomething  that  ought  to  be 
diflik'd.  This  is  a  certain  truth,  that  if  a  Merchant  has  not 
an  upright  Heart,  and  a  [159]  fufficient  ftock  of  Vertue  to 
withftand  the  various  Temptations  to  which  his  Bufinefs  lays 
him  open,  he  violates  every  foot  the  meafures  of  Juftice, 
Equity,  Charity,  Sincerity,  and  true  Faith.  Are  not  they 
chargeable  with  flaming  Wickednefs,  when  they  give  us  forry 
Commodities  in  exchange  for  our  Beaver  Skins,  which  a  blind 


592  Some  New  Voyages 

Man  may  deal  in  without  being  cheated  ?  I  have  done,  my 
dear  Brother,  I  mull  now  return  to  the  Village,  where  I'll  ftay 
for  you  to  Morrow  after  Dinner. 

Lahontan.  I  am  come,  Adario,  to  thy  Apartment,  to  pay 
my  Refpects  to  thy  Grandfather,  who  I  hear  lies  very  ill.  'Tis 
to  be  fear'd  that  the  good  old  Gentleman  may  be  long  afflicted 
with  the  uneafiness  he  now  complains  of;  one  would  think  that 
a  Man  of  his  Age,  who  reckons  upon  Seventy  Years,  might 
refrain  the  mooting  of  Turtle-Doves.  I've  obferv'd  for  a  long 
time,  that  your  old  Folks  are  always  in  Motion  and  Action, 
which  is  the  ready  way  to  exhauft  fpeedily  the  little  Strength 
that's  left  'em.  I'll  tell  thee,  Adario,  thou  rauft  fend  one  of 
thy  Slaves  for  my  Surgeon,  who  underftands  Phyfick  well 
enough ;  for  I'm  morally  affur'd  that  he'l  give  him  eafe  in  a 
Minute :  This  Feaver  is  fo  inconfiderable  that  it  can't  reach 
his  Life,  unlefs  it  reaches  to  a  greater  height. 

Adario.  Thou  knoweft  very  well,  my  dear  Brother,  that  I 
have  been  a  mortal  Enemy  to  your  Phyficians,  ever  fince  I  faw 
ten  or  twelve  Perfons  die  in  their  Hands,  through  the  tyranny 
of  their  Remedies.  My  Grandfather  that  you  take  to  be 
Seventy  Years  old  is  full  Ninety  eight.  He  Marry'd  at  Thirty 
Y'ears  of  Age ;  my  Father  was  Marry'd  at  Thirty  two,  and  I 
am  now  Thirty  five  Years  old.  'Tis  true  he  is  of  a  [160] 
ftrong  Conftitution,  and  that  this  Age  could  not  be  attain'd 
in  Europe,  where  People  die  earlier.  One  of  thefe  Days  I'll 
fhew  you  fourteen  or  fifteen  old  Men  that  are  turn'd  of  a 
Hundred,  nay  one  of  'em  a  Hundred  and  twenty  four.     I 


to  North-America.  593 

knew  another  that  dy'd  fix  Years  ago  at  the  Age  of  a  Hun- 
dred and  forty.1  As  for  the  reftlefs  Life  that  you  find  fault 
with  in  our  old  Men,  I  can  affure  you  on  the  contrary,  that 
if  they  lay  loytering  upon  their  Mats  in  the  Huts,  and  did 
nothing  but  Eat,  Drink  and  Sleep,  they  would  become  heavy 
and  dull  and  unfit  for  Action;  and  for  as  much  as  their 
continuall  reft  would  hinder  the  infenfible  Tranfpiration,  the 
Humours  then  recoyling  would  rejoin  the  Blood,  and  thus  by 
a  natural  effect  their  Limbs  and  Kidneys  would  be  fo  infeebled 
and  wafted,  that  a  mortal  Phthifick  would  enfue.  This  is  an 
Obfervation  of  long  (landing,  that  proves  true  in  all  the 
Nations  of  Canada.  The  Jugglers  are  to  be  here  prefently  to 
try  their  Skill,  and  to  find  out  what  Meat  or  Fifh  is  requifite 
for  the  cure  of  this  Diftemper.  My  Slaves  are  now  ready  to 
go  either  a  Hunting  or  Fifhing,  and  if  you'l  tarry  an  Hour  or 
two  with  me,  you  fhall  fee  the  apifh  tricks  of  thefe  Mounte- 
banks, whom  we  know  to  be  fuch  when  we  are  well,  and  yet 
fend  for  'em  with  great  impatience  .when  any  dangerous  Dif- 
temper feizes  us. 

Lahontan.  You  muft  confider,  my  dear  Adario,  that  in  fuch 
cafes  our  Mind  is  fick  as  well  as  the  Body.  We  in  Europe  do 
the  fame  thing  by  our  Phyficians.  When  a  Man  enjoys  his 
Health  he  hates  and  avoids  the  Phyficians  ;  but  when  he 
apprehends  himfelf  out  of  order,  notwithftanding  that  he 
knows  the  uncertainity  of  their  Art,  he  calls  a  Confultation 
of  a  Dozen :  Some  who  have  no  other  Illnefs  than  what  Fancy 
fuggefts,  [161]  do  melt  down  their  Bodies  by  fuch  Remedies 

1  On  the  subject  of  Indian  longevity,  see  p.  431,  note  2,  ante. —  Ed. 
38 


594  Some  New  Voyages 

as  would  kill  a  Horfe.  I  own,  indeed,  that  you  have  no  fuch 
Fools  among  you ;  but  to  make  the  Parallel  even,  you  take 
no  care  of  your  Health ;  for  you  run  at  the  Hunting  ftark 
naked  from  Morning  to  Night;  you  dance  three  or  four 
Hours  an  end  till  you  fweat  again,  and  the  playing  at  the 
Ball  in  a  Company  of  fix  or  feven  Hundred  Perfons  on  a  fide, 
to  tofs  it  half  a  League  one  way  or  t'other,  is  an  infinite  Fatigue 
to  your  Bodies ;  it  infeebles  the  Parts,  difperfes  the  Spirits, 
fowers  the  mafs  of  Blood  and  Humours,  and  breaks  the  union 
of  their  Principles.  At  this  rate  a  Man  that  might  otherwife 
have  liv'd  a  Hundred  Years  is  fweep'd  off  at  Eighty. 

Adario.  Suppofing  all  you  fay  to  be  true,  what  fignifies  it 
for  a  Man  to  live  fo  long,  fince  Life  is  a  fort  of  Death  after 
that  Age?  Perhaps  your  Reafons  may  bear  as  to  the  French, 
the  generality  of  whom  being  lazy  and  flothful,  have  an  aver- 
fion  to  all  manner  of  violent  Exercifes.  They  are  of  the  fame 
temper  with  our  fuperannuated  Perfons,  that  live  in  fuch  a 
ftupid  infenfible  way ;  that  they  never  ftir  out  of  their  Huts 
but  when  they  take  Fire.  Our  Temperaments  and  Com- 
plexions are  as  widely  different  from  yours  as  Night  from 
Day :  And  that  remarkable  difference  that  I  obferve  between 
the  Europeans  and  the  People  of  Canada,  upon  all  things  in 
general,  is  to  me  an  Argument  that  we  are  not  defcended  of 
your  pretended  Adam.  Among  us  you  fhan't  hear  in  an  Age, 
of  one  that  is  Hunch-back'd,  or  Lame,  or  Dwarfifh,  or  Deaf, 
or  Dumb,  or  Blind  from  their  Infancy,  and  far  lefs  any  that 
is  One-ey'd;  for  when  a  one-ey'd  Creature  comes  into  the 
World  among  us,  we  look  upon  it  as  a  Prefage  of  the  enfuing 


to  iVor^-America.  595 

Calamity  [162]  of  the  Nation,  and  have  frequently  experienc'd 
the  truth  of  the  Prophecy.  A  one-ey'd  Creature  is  equally 
deftitute  of  Senfe  and  of  an  upright  Heart;  he  is  Malicious, 
Goatifh  and  Slothful  to  the  laft  degree ;  he  is  more  cowardly 
than  a  Hare,  and  never  goes  a  Hunting  for  fear  of  running 
his  one  Eye  againft  the  Branch  of  a  Tree.  As  for  our  Difeafes, 
we  know  no  fuch  thing  as  your  T)ropfies,  Afthmas,  Palfy's,  Gout 
and  Pox.  The  Leprofy,  the  Lethargy,  External  Swellings,  the 
SuppreJJion  of  Urine,  the  Stone  and  the  Gravel,  are  Diftempers 
that  we  are  not  acquainted  with ;  to  the  great  Aftonifhment 
of  the  French,  who  are  fo  liable  to  'em.  Fevers  indeed  reign 
among  us,  efpecially  upon  our  return  from  any  Warlike 
Expedition,  and  proceed  from  our  lying  in  the  open  Air,  our 
croffing  of  Marfhes,  wading  over  Rivers,  our  faffing  two  or 
three  Days  at  a  time,  eating  cold  Victuals,  &c.  Sometimes 
Pleurifies  prove  mortal  to  us,  when  we  heat  our  felves  with 
running,  whether  in  Military  or  Hunting  Adventures,  and 
then  drink  fuch  Water  as  we  are  unacquainted  with :  And 
Colicks  attack  us  now  and  then  upon  the  fame  occafion.  We 
are  fubjeci  to  the  Meazles  and  the  Small  Pox,  and  that  we  owe 
to  one  of  two  Reafons.  Either  we  eat  fo  much  Fifh,  that  the 
Blood  it  produces  is  of  a  different  temper  from  that  proceed- 
ing from  Meat,  and  thereupon  boils  in  the  Veffels  with  greater 
Violence,  and  throws  out  its  thick  and  coarfe  Particles  upon 
the  infenfible  Pores  of  the  Skin.  Or  elfe  the  bad  Air  pen'd 
up  in  our  Villages  for  want  of  Windows  to  our  Huts,  makes 
fo  much  Fire  and  Smoak,  that  the  difproportion  between  the 
Particles   of  the   confin'd  Air  and    thofe  of  our  Blood    and 


596  Some  New  Voyages 

Humours,  gives  rife  to  fuch  Infirmities.     Now  thefe  are  the 
only  Diftempers  that  vifit  us. 

[163]  Lahontan.  This,  my  dear  Adario,  is  the  firft  time  I 
have  heard  thee  reafon  juftly  fince  the  Commencement  of  our 
Conferences.  I  acknowledge,  you  are  exempted  from  an 
infinity  of  Evils  that  lie  heavy  upon  us,  and  the  reafon  of  this 
Happinefs  may  be  gather'd  from  what  you  offer'd  t'other  Day, 
namely,  That  the  repofe  of  one's  Mind  is  the  greatejl  Ingredient  of 
Health.  The  Hurons  being  confin'd  to  the  bare  knowledge 
of  Hunting,  do  not  fatigue  their  Spirits,  and  impair  their 
Healths,  in  the  purfuit  of  an  infinity  of  fine  Sciences,  in 
watching  unfeafonably,  breaking  their  reft  and  toiling  hard  at 
the  ftudious  Anvil.  With  us,  a  Man  bred  to  the  Sword 
makes  it  his  bufinefs  to  read  and  know  the  Hiftory  of  the 
Wars  that  have  happen'd  in  the  World,  and  to  make  himfelf 
acquainted  with  the  Art  of  Fortifying,  Attacking  and  Defend- 
ing Places :  This  ingroffes  his  whole  time,  which  after  all  is 
too  little  to  procure  him  the  Accomplishments  he  defires.  A 
Man  that  takes  to  the  Church  plyes  the  Study  of  Theology 
Night  and  Day,  for  the  good  and  intereft  of  Religion ;  he 
writes  Books  to  inftrucl  People  in  the  concerns  of  their  Salva- 
tion, and  Dedicating  to  God  the  Hours,  the  Days,  the  Months, 
and  the  Years  of  his  Life,  receives  after  this  Life  an  Eternal 
Inheritance  by  way  of  Recompence.  Our  Judges  apply  them- 
felves  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Laws  Night  and  Day,  they 
examin  Bills  and  Proceffes ;  they  give  continual  Audience  to 
an  infinity  of  Plaintiffs  that  teaze  'em  without  Intermiflion; 
in  fine  they  can  fcarce  fpare  leifure  to  Eat  or  Drink.     Our 


to  iVor^-America.  597 

Phyficians  purfue  the  Science  of  rendring  Men  Immortal, 
they  run  about  from  Patient  to  Patient,  from  Hofpital  to 
Hofpital,  in  order  to  learn  the  Nature  and  the  Caufe  of  dif- 
ferent Diftempers  :  They  rack  [164]  their  Brains  in  unlocking 
the  Qualities  of  Drugs,  Herbs  and  Simples,  by  a  thoufand 
uncommon  and  curious  Experiments.  The  Cofmographers 
and  Aftronomers  bend  all  their  thoughts  upon  the  difcovery  of 
the  Figure,  Magnitude  and  Compofition  of  Heaven  and 
Earth.  The  former  can  trace  the  leaft  Star  in  the  Firmament, 
they  meafure  its  courfe,  its  diftance  from  the  Ecliptick,  its 
afcenfion  and  declination :  The  latter  know  how  to  diftinguifh 
Climates,  and  the  various  Pofitions  of  the  Globe  of  the  Earth ; 
they  are  acquainted  with  the  Seas,  Lakes,  Rivers,  Ifles,  Gulfs; 
they  compute  the  diftances  of  one  Country  from  another ;  and 
in  fine,  all  the  Nations  of  the  World  are  known  to  them,  as 
well  as  their  Religions,  their  Laws,  their  Languages,  their 
Cuftoms,  and  their  various  Forms  of  Government.  To  wind 
up  all  into  one  Word,  all  the  Profeffors  of  Sciences  are  very 
fenfible  that  they  purfue  their  Studies  with  too  much  Appli- 
cation, and  thereby  murder  their  Health.  For  the  animal 
Spirits  are  not  ftrain'd  out  in  the  Brain,  but  in  proportion  to 
the  fupplies  of  fine  Blood  that  it  receives  from  the  Heart; 
and  the  Heart  being  a  Mufcle  can't  fquirt  out  the  Blood  into 
all  the  parts  of  the  Body  without  the  Influence  of  the  animal 
Spirits.  Now,  when  the  Soul  is  Serene  and  all  Tranquility  as 
thine  is,  the  Brain  fupplies  all  the  parts  of  the  Body  with  as 
much  as  they  have  occafion  for  in  order  to  perform  the  Offices 
allotted  'em  by  Nature :   Whereas  in  the  cafe  of  a  profound 


598  Some  New  Voyages 

Application  to  Sciences,  the  Soul  being  tofs'd  and  perplex'd 
with  a  croud  of  Thoughts,  the  Spirits  are  much  exhaufted  and 
difpers'd,  both  by  long  watchings  and  by  the  racking  of  the 
Imagination.  In  this  cafe  all  the  Spirits  that  the  Brain  can 
form  are  fcarce  fufficient  to  recruit  the  parts  employ'd  by  the 
Soul  [165]  in  the  precipitant  Motions  it  calls  for;  and  there 
being  but  a  fmall  Stock  of  Spirits  in  the  Nerves,  which  convey 
'em  to  the  parts  that  minifter  to  the  Digeftion  of  what  we  eat, 
their  Fibres  have  a  languid  drooping  motion:  And  thus  it 
comes  to  pafs  that  the  A&ions  of  the  Body  are  lamely  per- 
form'd,  the  Digeftion  is  imperfect,  the  Serum  flies  off  from 
the  Blood,  and  by  falling  upon  the  Head,  the  Limbs,  the 
Nerves,  the  Breaft  and  other  parts,  gives  rife  to  the  Dropfy, 
Gout,  and  Palfy ;  and  to  all  the  other  Difeafes  you  took 
notice  of  but  now. 

Adario.  At  that  rate,  my  dear  Brother,  it  muft  be  only  the 
Learned  Men  that  fall  into  fuch  Diforders :  And  upon  that 
foot,  I  hope  you'll  own  that  one  had  better  be  a  Huron  than  a 
Science-Hunter,  confidering  that  Health  is  the  mod  valuable  of 
all  good  things.  But  at  the  fame  time,  I  know  very  well  that 
thefe  Diftempers  have  no  refpecl  of  Perfons,  but  fall  upon  the 
Ignorant  as  well  as  thofe  of  a  greater  Character.  Not  that  I 
deny  what  thou  fayeft,  for  I  am  fully  convinc'd  that  Brain- 
Work  infeebles  the  Body  extreamly;  and  I  have  often  won- 
der'd  how  your  Conftitution  comes  to  be  fo  ftrong,  as  to  keep 
up  againft  the  violent  Shocks  of  Difcontent  and  Fret,  that  you 
feel  when  things  go  crofs  with  you.     I  have  feen  fome  French 


to  North-America..  599 

Men  tear  their  Hair,  others  cry  and  weep  bitterly  like  Women 
Burning  at  a  Stake,  others  again  abftain  from  eating  or  drink- 
ing for  two  days,  and  fuffer  fuch  violent  Sallies  of  Paflion  as 
to  dafh  every  thing  in  pieces  that  came  in  their  way:  And 
when  all  came  to  all,  their  Health  did  not  appear  to  be  affe&ed. 
Queftionlefs,  their  Nature  muft  be  different  from  ours;  for 
there's  never  a  Huron  in  the  World  that  would  not  die  in  a 
days  time  upon  incountring  the  hundredth  part  of  fuch  Tran- 
fports.  Ay,  moft  certainly,  [166]  you  are  of  a  different 
Mould  from  us ;  for  your  Wines,  your  Brandy,  and  your 
Spices,  make  us  Sick  unto  death ;  whereas  you  can't  live  for- 
footh  without  fuch  Drugs :  Befides,  your  Blood  is  Salt  and 
ours  is  not ;  you  have  got  Beards,  and  we  have  none.  Nay 
farther;  I  have  obferv'd  that  before  you  pafs  the  Age  of 
thirty  five  or  forty,  you  are  Stronger  and  more  Robuft  than 
we ;  for  we  can't  carry  fuch  heavy  Loads  as  you  do  till  that 
Age ;  but  after  that  your  Strength  dwindles  and  vifibly  de- 
clines, whereas  ours  keeps  to  its  wonted  pitch  till  we  count 
fifty  five  or  fixty  years  of  Age.  This  is  a  truth  that  our  young 
Women  can  vouch  for.  They  tell  you  that  when  a  young 
French-man  obliges  'em  fix  times  a  night,  a  young  Huron  do's 
not  rife  to  above  half  the  number ;  and  with  the  fame  Breath 
they  declare,  that  the  French  are  older  in  that  Trade  at  thirty 
five,  than  the  Hurons  are  at  fifty  years  of  Age.  This  intelli- 
gence given  in  by  our  good  Girles,  who  are  better  pleas'd 
with  your  young  Men's  over-doing,  than  with  the  Moderation 
of  our  Youths ;  This  intelligence,  I  fay,  led  me  to  think  that 


600  Some  New  Voyages 

your  Gout,  Dropfy,  Phthifick,  Palfy,  Stone,  and  Gravel,  and 
the  other  Diftempers  above  mention'd,  are  cerfainly  occafion'd, 
not  only  by  the  immoderatenefs  of  thefe  Pleafures,  but  by  the 
unfeafonablenefs  of  the  time,  and  the  inconveniency  of  the 
way  in  which  you  purfue  'em  ;  for  when  you  have  but  juft  done 
eating,  or  are  newly  come  off  a  fatiguing  bout,  you  lie  with 
your  Women  as  often  as  ever  you  can,  and  that  either  upon 
Chairs,  or  in  a  Standing  Pofture,  without  considering  the 
Damage  that  accrues  from  fuch  indifcretion :  Witnefs  the  com- 
mon practice  of  thefe  young  Sparks  in  the  Village  of  Doffenra, 
who  make  their  Table  ferve  for  a  Bed.  For  the  purpofe  ;  you 
are  fubject  to  two  Difeafes  more,  [167]  that  we  are  free  from. 
The  firft  is  that  call'd  by  the  Illinefe,  the  hot  Diftemper,  for  that 
People  are  liable  to  it  as  well  as  thofe  who  live  upon  the 
MiJJifipi.  This  Malady  goes  by  the  Name  of  the  Venereal 
Diftemper  in  your  Country.  The  other  is  that  you  call  the 
Scurvy,  which  we  Style,  the  cold  evil,  with  regard  to  the  Symp- 
toms and  Caufes  of  that  Diftemper,  that  we  have  obferv'd 
fince  the  Arrival  of  the  French  in  Canada.  You  fee  therefore 
that  you  are  liable  to  a  great  many  Difeafes,  and  thofe  fuch  as 
are  not  eafily  Cur'd.  Inftead  of  retrieving  your  Health,  your 
Phyficians  murder  you,  by  exhibiting  Remedies  calculated  for 
their  own  Intereft,  which  fpin  out  the  Diftemper  and  kill  you 
at  laft.  A  Phyfician  would  be  ftill  Poor  if  he  cur'd  his  Patients 
fpeedily.  The  men  of  that  Profeffion  are  cautious  of  approv- 
ing of  our  way  of  Sweating ;  for  they  know  the  confequence 
of  it  too  well,  and  when  their  Advice  is  ask'd  upon  the  matter, 


to  North- America.  60 1 

their  Anfwer  is  to  this  purpofe.     None  but  fools  are  capable  of 
imitating  fools ;   the  Savages  have  not  the  name  of  Savages  for 
nothing;  and  their  Remedies  are  as  Savage  as  themf elves.    If  'tis 
true  that  after  Sweating,  they  throw  themfelves  into  cold  Water  or 
into  Snow,  without  prefent  death ;  their  good  luck  is  ozving  to  the 
Air  of  the  Climate,  and  to  their  way  of  Feeding,  which  differs 
from  ours.    But  notwithflanding  this  favourable  Circumflance,  fuch 
and  fuch  a  Savage,  that  would  otherwife  have  outliv'd  a  hundred 
years  of  age,  was  cut  off  at  eighty  by  the  ufe  of  that  terrible  Remedy. 
Such  is  the  Language  of  your  Phyficians,  by  which  they  mean 
to  fcare  the  Europeans  from  the  ufe  of  our  Remedies :  Tho' 
at  the  fame  time,  'tis  certain  that  if  you  had  a  mind  to  Sweat 
after  our  way  now  and  then,  you  might  do  it  with  the  greateft 
eafe  and  fafety  in  the  World,  and  by  that  means  all  the  evil 
Humours  engendred  in  [168]  your  Blood  by  your  Wine,  your 
Spices,  your  intemperate  Venery,  your  Unfeafonable  Watch- 
ing and  your  other  Fatigues,  would  be  evacuated  by  the  Pores 
of  the  Skin.     Were  this  Method  follow'd,  you  might  bid  an 
eternal  Adieu  to  Phyfick,  and  all  its  Poifonous  Ingredients. 
This,  my  dear  Brother,  is  as  manifeft  as  the  Sun-Shine ;  tho' 
'twill  not  go  down  with  the  Ignorant,  who  talk  of  nothing  but 
Pleurifies  and  Rheumatifms,  as  the  Confequents  of  this  Cure. 
Tis  ftrange,  methinks,  they  will  not  give  Ear  to  the  Anfwer 
we  make  to  the  Objection  Started  by  your  Phyficians  againft 
our  way  of  Sweating.     'Tis  an  undifputed  Truth  that  Nature 
is  a  good  kind  Mother,  which  defires  to  eternife  our  Lives ; 
and  yet  we  plague  and  torment  her  fo  violently,  that  fome- 


602  Some  New  Voyages 

times  fhe's  brought  to  a  low  and  weak  condition,  and  is  fcarce 
able  to  Succour  us.  Our  Debauches  and  Fatigues  create  de- 
prav'd  Humours,  which  Nature  would  throw  out  of  the  Body, 
if  She  had  but  Strength  enough  to  open  the  Gates,  viz.  the 
Pores  of  the  Skin.  'Tis  true  fhe  expells  as  much  as  me  can,  by 
Urine  and  Stool,  by  the  Mouth,  Nofe,  and  infenfible  Tranfpir- 
ation :  But  fometimes  the  quantity  of  the  Serofities  is  fo  over- 
bearing that  they  overflow  all  the  parts  of  the  Body  between 
the  Skin  and  the  Flefh :  And  in  that  cafe  'tis  our  bufinefs  to 
procure  their  egrefs  the  fpeedyeft  and  fhorteft  way,  for  fear 
their  longer  ftay  mould  give  rife  to  this  Gout,  Rheumatifm, 
Dropfy,  Palfy,  and  all  the  other  Diftempers  that  fink  a  healthy 
State.  Now,  to  compafs  this  end,  we  muft  unlock  the  Pores 
by  the  means  of  Sweating ;  and  withal  take  care  to  fhut  'em 
foon  after,  left  the  nutritive  juice  mould  glide  out  by  the  fame 
paffage ;  which  can  be  no  otherwife  prevented  than  by  throw- 
ing our  felves  into  cold  Water,  as  we  ufually  do.  [169]  'Tis 
the  fame  cafe  as  if  Wolves  were  got  into  your  Sheep  Folds ;  for 
then  you  would  open  the  Doors  that  the  mifchievous  Animals 
might  turn  out ;  but  after  they're  once  out  of  Doors,  you 
would  not  fail  to  fhut  'em  again  for  fear  your  Sheep  mould  run 
after  'em.  I  own  indeed  that  your  Phyficians  fay  well,  when 
they  plead  that  a  Man  who  has  over-heated  himfelf  by  Hunting 
or  any  violent  Exercife,  indangers  his  Life  by  throwing  himfelf 
immediately  into  cold  Water.  That  I  take  to  be  an  uncon- 
tefted  truth;  for  the  Blood  which  in  that  Cafe  is  agitated 
and  boils  as  it  were  in  the  Veins,  would  certainly  congeal; 
juft  as  boiling  Water  congeals  fooner  than  cold  Water,  when 


to  North- America.  603 

expos'd  to  the  Froft  or  put  into  a  cold  Fountain.  This  is  the 
Sum  of  my  Thoughts  upon  that  Head.  As  to  what  remains, 
I  grant  we  are  liable  to  Difeafes,  that  equally  invade  both  us 
and  the  French  ;  namely,  the  Small-Pox,  Fevers,  Pleurifies,  and 
fometimes  to  what  you  call  the  Hypochondriac  Illnefs :  For 
we  have  fome  Fools  among  us  who  fancy  they  are  poffefs'd 
by  a  little  Manitou  or  Spirit  of  the  bignefs  of  one's  Fift  ;  which 
in  our  Language  we  call  Aontaerobi ;  and  affirm  that  this  Spirit 
is  lodg'd  in  their  Body,  and  particularly  in  a  certain  Member 
that  ails  never  fo  little.  This  imaginary  Diftemper  proceeds 
from  their  Simplicity  and  weaknefs  of  Mind :  For  in  fhort, 
we  are  not  without  ignorant  foolifh  Fellows  among  us,  no 
more  than  you.  You  may  fee  every  day  fome  Hurons,  above 
fifty  years  of  Age,  who  have  lefs  Senfe  and  Difcretion  than  a 
young  Girl ;  fome  who  are  as  Superftitious  as  your  felves,  in 
believing  that  the  Spirit  of  Dreams  is  the  Ambaffadour  and 
Meffenger  whom  the  Great  Spirit  imploys  to  acquaint  Men 
with  their  Duty.  As  for  our  Jugglers,  they  are  Mountebanks 
and  Cheats  of  the  fame  form  with  your  Phyficians ;  [170] 
only  they  content  themfelves  with  the  having  of  good  Chear 
at  their  Patient's  coft,  without  fending  'em  to  the  other  World 
in  acknowledgment  of  their  Feafts  and  Prefents.1 

Lahontan.  My  deareft  Adario,  I  honour  thee  beyond  all 
expreffion,  for  now  thou  argueft  juftly.  You  never  fpoke  more 
to  the  purpofe  in  your  life  time.     Every  word  you  have  faid 


1  The  feast  was  one  of  the  chief  ceremonies  connected  with  the  efforts  of  the  medi- 
cine men  to  expel  disease  ;  in  this,  the  conjurer  played  the  part  of  host.  See  Jes. 
Rel.,  x,  pp.  179,  183,  197  ;  1,  p.  295. —  Ed. 


604  Some  New  Voyages 

of  Sweating  is  abfolutely  true ;  and  I  know  it  to  be  fo  by 
experience,  infomuch  that  while  I  live,  I  will  never  ufe  any 
other  Remedy  than  your  way  of  Sweating.  But  at  the  fame 
time,  I  would  not  have  you  run  down  Bleeding,  fo  much  as  you 
did  t'other  day,  when  you  endeavour'd  by  a  multiplicity  of 
Arguments  to  make  out  the  neceflity  of  faving  our  Blood,  as 
being  the  Treafure  of  Life.  I  do  not  difpute  its  being  the 
Treafure  of  Life ;  but  I  rauft  needs  fay  that  your  Remedies 
againft  Pleurefies  and  Inflamations,  take  effect  only  by  chance, 
for  out  of  twenty  Sick  People  commonly  fifteen  die ;  whereas 
Bleeding  in  fuch  a  cafe  might  Cure  'em  all.  I  own  that  this 
method  of  Cure  fhortens  their  lives,  and  that  a  man  that  has 
Bled  often  can't  hold  out  fo  long  as  another  that  has  done  it 
but  feldom ;  but  a  Man  lying  on  a  Sick  Bed,  wants  to  be 
cur'd  at  any  rate,  and  thinks  of  nothing  elfe  but  the  prefent 
recovery  of  his  Health ;  tho'  it  fhould  coft  him  the  Subtrac- 
tion of  fome  years  from  his  life,  together  with  the  lofs  of  his 
Blood.  In  fine,  all  the  Remarks  I  have  made  on  the  Subject 
in  hand,  center  in  this ;  that  the  People  of  Canada  have  a 
better  Complexion  than  the  Europeans,  that  they  are  more 
Indefatigable  and  Robuft,  more  inur'd  to  Watching,  Fading 
and  other  hardmips,  more  infenfible  of  Cold  and  Heat ;  info- 
much  that  they  are  not  only  exempted  from  the  Paflions  that 
tumble  and  difturb  our  Souls,  but  likewife  melter'd  from  the 
Infirmities  that  we  groan  under.  You  are  [171]  poor  and 
miferable,  but  at  the  fame  time  you  have  the  benefit  of  perfect 
health :  But  we  who  enjoy  the  Conveniences  of  Life  and  the 
Inftruments  of  Eafe,  are  forc'd  either  thro'  Complaifance  or 


to  North- America.  605 

by  the  occafional  Adventures  of  life,  to  Murder  our  felves  by 
an  infinity  of  Debauches,  to  which  you  are  never  expos'd. 

Adar'io.  My  Brother,  I  come  to  Vifit  thee,  and  am  accom- 
pany'd  by  my  Daughter,  who  is  about  to  Marry,  againft  my 
Will,  a  young  Man  that's  as  good  a  Warriour  as  he's  a  forry 
Huntfman.  She  has  a  mind  to't ;  and  that  is  enough  in  our 
Country :  But  'tis  not  fo  in  France,  where  the  Parents  muft 
confent  to  the  Marrying  of  their  Children.  I  am  oblig'd  to 
comply  with  my  Daughter's  demands :  For  if  I  pretend  to 
Marry  her  again,  fhe'd  quickly  return  upon  me ;  What  do  you 
think  Father  !  Am  I  your  Slave  ?  Shall  not  I  enjoy  my  Liberty  ? 
Muft  I  for  your  fancy,  Marry  a  Man  I  do  not  care  for  ?  How  can 
I  endure  a  Husband  that  buys  my  Corps  of  my  Father,  and  what 
value  fliall  I  have  for  fuch  a  Father  as  makes  Brokerage  of  his 
Daughter  to  a  Brute  ?  And  how  can  I  have  an  affetlion  for  the 
Children  of  a  Man  I  cannot  love  ?  If  I  fhould  Marry  him  in 
obedience  to  you,  and  go  from  him  in  fifteen  days  time,  as  the  Privi- 
ledges  and  natural  Liberties  of  the  Nation  would  allow  ;  you'll  tell 
me  'tis  not  well  done  ;  and  'twould  trouble  you,  all  the  World  would 
laugh  at  it,  and  perhaps  I  might  prove  with  Child.  Thus,  dear 
Brother,  would  my  Girl  anfvver  me,  and  it  may  be  a  great  deal 
worfe,  as  it  happened  fome  years  ago  to  one  of  our  old  Men, 
who  pretended  to  Marry  his  Daughter  to  a  Man  fhe  did  not 
love,  for  in  my  Prefence  fhe  faid  a  great  many  harm  things  by 
way  of  Reproach:  Insinuating  that  a  Man  of  Spirit  ought  not 
to  expofe  himfelf,  in  offering  to  advife  a  Perfon  from  whom 
he  may   [172]    receive   fuch   affronts;    neither  ought  he  to 


606  Some  New  Voyages 

require  fuch  refpecls  from  his  Children  as  he  knows  to  be 
impracticable.  She  added  then,  'twas  true  fie  was  his  Daugh- 
ter, and  he  might  be  fatisfied.  He  got  her  upon  a  Woman  he  loved 
as  much  as  [he  hated  the  Husband  her  Father  had  provided  for  her. 
You  muft  know,  we  never  have  a  Marriage  contracted  between 
Relations,  let  the  degree  be  never  fo  remote.1  Our  Women 
never  Marry  again  after  they're  forty  years  of  Age,  becaufe 
the  Children  they  have  after  that  Age  are  generally  of  a 
weakly  Conftitution.  Not  that  they  are  the  more  Continent 
for  this :  On  the  contrary,  you'll  find  them  more  paiTionately 
inclin'd  than  a  Girl  of  twenty.  And  'tis  for  this  reafon  that 
they  entertain  the  French  fo  kindly ;  nay,  and  fometimes  give 
themfelves  the  trouble  to  follow  them.  However  you  know 
that  our  Women  .are  not  fo  Fruitful  as  the  French,  tho'  they 
admit  of  more  frequent  Embraces  ;  which  to  me  is  very  ftrange, 
for  'tis  quite  contrary  to  what  might  be  expected. 

Lahontan.  Tis  for  the  fame  reafon,  my  poor  Adario,  that 
they  Conceive  not  fo  eafily  as  ours.  If  they  did  not  indulge 
themfelves  too  much  in  the  frequency  of  Embraces,  and 
receive  'em  with  an  over-bearing  Keennefs,  the  Matter  cal- 
culated for  the  production  of  Children,  would  have  time  to 
affume  the  neceffary  qualities  for  the  bufinefs  of  Generation. 
It's  the  fame  cafe  with  a  Field  that  is  Sowed  continually  with- 
out being  fuffered  to  ly  Fallow,  for  at  laft  it  will  produce 
nothing  (as  Experience  plainly  (hews;)  on  the  other  fide,  if 
you  forbear  the   Ground,   the   Earth   regains   its   force,  the 

1  Marriage  between  members  of  the  same  gens  was  forbidden  among  many  of  the 
Indian  tribes,  as  such  persons  were  assumed  to  be  consanguine. —  Ed. 


to  North- America.  607 

Serene  Air,  the  Rain  and  the  Sun  give  it  a  new  Sap,  which 
makes  the  Seed  to  Sprout.  But  prithee,  my  dear  Friend, 
fuffer  me  to  ask  thee  one  Queftion.  What  is  the  reafon  that 
the  Women-Savages,  being  fo  rarely  [173]  Fruitful,  have  the 
Increafe  of  their  Nation  fo  little  in  view,  that  a  Woman  fhall 
make  her  felf  Mifcarry  when  the  Father  of  the  Child  dies,  or 
is  kilFd,  before  fhe  is  brought  to  Bed?  You'll  tell  me,  fhe 
do's  it  to  fave  her  Reputation ;  becaufe,  without  that  Precau- 
tion (he  would  never  have  another  Husband.  But  it  would 
feem  the  Intereft  of  the  Nation,  which  lies  in  its  Increafe  and 
Multiplication,  is  but  little  regarded  by  your  Women.  Nov/, 
it  is  not  fo  with  ours,  for,  as  you  faid  t'other  day,  our  Coureurs 
de  Bois  and  many  others,  find  very  often  new  Children  in  their 
Houfes,  at  their  return  from  their  Journeys :  But  they  are 
not  much  diffatisfied,  upon  the  confederation,  that  this  adds  fo 
many  Bodys  for  the  Nation,  and  fo  many  Souls  for  Heaven : 
Tho'  after  all,  their  Women  undergo  as  much  difgrace  upon 
fuch  occafions  as  yours  do,  and  fometimes  are  Imprifoned  for 
Life,  while  yours  are  allow'd  to  entertain  as  many  Gallants 
as  they  pleafe  afterwards.  'Tis  a  moft  abominable  piece  of 
Cruelty  for  a  Woman  to  make  away  with  her  Child :  A 
Crime  which  the  Author  of  Life  will  never  pardon:  And 
this  is  one  of  the  greateft  Abufes  to  be  reformed  among  you. 
You  ought  to  difcountenance  Nakednefs  too ;  for  the  liberty 
which  your  Boys  have  of  going  Naked,  makes  a  terrible 
Hurricane  in  the  Minds  of  your  young  Girls ;  as  they  are  not 
made  of  Brafs,  fo  the  view  of  thofe  parts  which  decency 
forbids  me  to  name,  can't  but  call  up  the  Amorous  Fire, 


608  Some  New  Voyages 

efpecially   when    the    young   Wantons   mew   that   Nature   is 
neither  dead  nor  untrue  to  the  Adventures  of  Love. 

Adario.  I  take  it,  you  account  for  the  Barrennefs  of  our 
Women  admirably  ;  for  I  perceive  how  that  may  come  to  pafs : 
And  as  for  the  Criminal  Practice  of  our  young  Women  in 
taking  [174]  Potions  to  make  themfelves  Mifcarry ;  I  find 
your  Reflections  upon  it  are  very  juft.  But  what  you  fay  of 
Nakednefs  do's  not  ftand  to  Reafon.  I  allow  that  in  a  Nation 
where  diftinctions  of  Property  are  acknowledg'd,  you  are  very 
much  in  the  right  of  it,  to  cover  not  only  fuch  parts  as  ought 
not  to  be  nam'd,  but  even  all  the  parts  of  the  Body.  What 
ufe  would  the  French  make  of  their  Gold  and  their  Silver, 
if  they  did  not  imploy  it  in  providing  themfelves  with  fine 
Cloaths?  Since  in  your  Country  Men  are  valued  according 
to  their  Drefs,  is  it  not  a  great  advantage  to  be  able  to  cover 
any  Defect  in  Nature  with  a  handfome  Habit?  In  earneft, 
Nakednefs  ought  not  to  offend  any  but  fuch  as  allow  Prop- 
erty. A  deform'd  or  decrepit  Man  among  you  has  found 
the  Secret  of  appearing  Handfome  or  well  Drefs'd,  in  a  Beau 
Perriwig  and  fine  Cloaths ;  under  which  'tis  impoflible  to  dif- 
tinguifh  Artificial  Shapes  from  fuch  as  are  Natural.  Befides, 
'twould  be  a  great  inconveniency  for  the  Europeans  to  go 
Naked  ;  for  thofe  who  are  well  provided  would  then  find  fo 
much  Imployment,  and  earn  fo  much  Mony  for  good  Services, 
that  they  would  not  dream  of  Marrying  as  long  as  they  liv'd ; 
not  to  mention  that  the  promifing  Afpect  would  tempt  the 
Married  Women  to  violate  their  Conjugal  Vows.  Now,  thefe 
reafons  can  have  no  place  among  us,  where  every  thing  muft 


to  iVor^-America.  609 

fit,  whether  great  or  little,  for  the  young  Women  taking  a 
view  of  the  Naked  parts,  make  their  choice  by  the  Eye :  And 
for  as  much  as  Nature  has  obferv'd  the  meafures  of  Propor- 
tion in  both  Sexes,  any  Woman  may  be  well  affur'd  what  fhe 
has  to  expecl:  from  a  Husband.  Our  Women  are  as  Fickle 
as  yours,  and  [175]  for  that  reafon  the  moft  defpicable  Man 
here  never  defpairs  of  having  a  Wife;  for  as  every  thing 
appears  naked  and  open  to  fight,  fo  every  Girl  choofes  ac- 
cording to  her  Fancy,  without  regarding  the  meafures  of 
Proportion.  Some  love  a  well  fhaped  Man  let  a  certain  mat- 
ter about  him  be  never  fo  little.  Others  make  choice  of  an 
ill  fhap'd  forry  like  Fellow,  by  reafon  of  the  goodly  fize  of  I 
know  not  what ;  and  others  again  pick  out  a  Man  of  Spirit 
and  Vigour  tho'  he  be  neither  well  fhap'd  nor  well  provided 
in  [the]  namelefs  Quarter, 

This,  my  dear  Brother,  is  all  the  Anfwer  I  have  to  give  to 
your  Charge  upon  the  fcore  of  Nudity;  which  you  know  lies 
only  againft  the  Youths ;  for  our  married  Men  and  Widows 
cover  themfelves  both  before  and  behind  with  a  great  deal  of 
Nicety.  And,  befides,  to  make  fome  Compenfation  for  the 
Nudity  of  our  Boys,  our  Girls  are  Modeller  than  yours, 
for  they  expofe  nothing  to  open  view  but  the  Calf  of  their 
Leg,  whereas  yours  lay  their  Breafts  open  in  fuch  a  Fafhion 
that  our  young  Men  run  their  Nofes  into  'em  when  they 
bargain  about  the  Beaver  Skins  with  your  handfom  She- 
merchants.  Is  not  this  a  Grievance  among  the  French  that 
wants  to  be  Redrefs'd  ?  For  I  have  it  from  very  good  Hands, 
that  fcarce  any  French  Woman  can  refill  the  temptation  of  an 


610  Some  New  Voyages 

object  that's  mov'd  by  her  naked  Breafts.  A  due  reformation 
of  this  indecent  Cuftom  would  be  a  means  to  preferve  their 
Husbands  from  the  Chimerical  Diftemper  of  Horns,  which 
you  plant  upon  their  Foreheads  without  ever  touching  or 
feeing  them,  and  that  by  a  Miracle  I  can't  fathom :  For  if  I 
plant  an  Apple-tree  in  a  Garden  it  does  not  grow  upon  the  top 
of  a  Rock ;  and  in  like  manner  one  would  think  your  invifible 
Horns  mould  take  root  only  [176]  in  the  place  where  their 
Seed  is  fown,  and  appear  in  the  Foreheads  of  the  Women,  as 
being  a  juft  reprefentation  of  the  Husbands  and  the  Spark's 
Tools.  In  fine,  this  whim  of  the  Horns  is  a  horrid  piece  of 
Indifcretion  ;  for  why  mould  you  affront  the  Husband  becaufe 
his  Wife  takes  her  Pleafure?  If  in  Marriage  a  Man  marries 
a  Woman's  Vices,  then  the  French  way  of  Marriage  is  an 
Oath  that  runs  counter  to  right  Reafon,  or  elfe  a  Man  muft 
keep  his  Wife  under  Lock  and  Key  to  avoid  the  difhonour  of 
her  Vices.  The  Husbands  that  retain  to  the  horned  Lift 
muft  needs  be  very  numerous;  for  I  can't  imagine  that  a 
Woman  can  brook  the  feverity  of  an  eternal  Chain,  without 
having  recourfe  to  fome  good  Friend  to  foften  her  Affli&ion. 
I  mould  pardon  the  French  if  they  made  the  Marriage  to  ftand 
only  upon  certain  Conditions,  that  is  upon  the  Provifo  that 
the  Woman  have  Children,  and  that  both  fhe  and  her  Hus- 
band keep  their  Health,  fo  as  to  be  able  to  difcharge  the 
Marriage  Duties  as  they  ought  to  do.  This  is  all  the  Regu- 
lation that  can  be  made  in  a  Nation  that  ftands  to  Meum  and 

Tuum. You  Chriftians  have  another  impertinent  Cuftom, 

which  I  can't  but  take  notice  of.     Your  Men  glory  in  the 


to  North- America.  6n 

Debauching  of  Women,  as  if  yielding  to  the  Temptations  of 
Love  were  not  equally  Criminal  in  either  Sex.  Your  young 
Sparks  ufe  their  utmoft  Efforts  to  tempt  the  Maids  and  mar- 
ried Women ;  they  fet  all  means  at  work  to  compafs  their 
end ;  and  when  Matters  of  their  Wimes  talk  publickly  of  the 
Adventure ;  upon  which  every  body  Cenfures  the  Lady,  and 
cries  up  the  Cavalier,  whereas  the  former  merits  a  Pardon,  and 
the  latter  deferves  to  be  Punifh'd.  How  d'ye  think  your 
Women  mould  be  Faithful  to  you,  if  you  are  Faithlefs  to 
them?  If  the  [177]  married  Men  keep  their  Cracks,  will  not 
their  Wives  keep  Company  with  other  Lovers?  And  if  a 
Husband  prefers  Gaming  and  Drinking  to  his  Wive's  Com- 
pany, will  not  his  Wife  Solace  her  felf  in  the  Company  of  a 
Friend  ?  Would  you  have  your  Wives  to  be  Wife  and  Dif- 
creet,  and  like  ours,  you  muft  Love  'em  as  your  felves,  and 
take  care  not  to  fell  'em ;  for  I  know  fome  Husbands  among 
you,  that  confent  as  mamefully  to  the  Debauching  of  their 
Wives,  as  fome  Mothers  do  to  the  Proftituting  of  their 
Daughters,  and  in  fuch  cafes  Neceffity  obliges  'em  to  it. 
From  hence  it  appears,  that  'tis  a  great  Happinefs  for  the 
Hurons  that  they  are  not  reduc'd  to  the  practice  of  fuch  mean 
Actions,  as  Mifery  occafions  among  thofe  who  are  not  inur'd 
to  it.  We  are  at  all  times  neither  rich  nor  poor,  and  our 
Happinefs  upon  this  fcore  goes  far  beyond  all  your  Riches ; 
for  we  are  not  forc'd  to  expofe  our  Wives  and  Daughters  to 
fale,  in  order  to  live  upon  their  Drudgery  in  the  way  of  Love. 
You'l  fay  our  Wives  and  Daughters  are  foolifh  and  fimple  ; 
and  indeed  I  grant  the  Allegation,  for  they  can't  write  Billet 


612  Some  New  Voyages 

don's  to  their  Acquaintances  as  yours  do ;  nay,  if  they  could 
write  they  have  not  the  fenfe  to  fingle  out  by  the  Rules  of 
Phyfiognomy  a   faithful   old  Woman   that  mall   carry  their 
Love-letters,  and  obferve  a  profound  Silence.     O !  that  curfed 
Writing ;    that    pernicious    Invention   of   the  Europeans  who 
tremble  at  the  fight  of  their  own  Chimera's,  which  they  draw 
themfelves,  by  the  ranking  and  difpofal  of  three  and  twenty 
fmall  Figures,  that  are  Calculated,  not  for  the  Inftru&ion  but 
for  the  Perplexing  of  Men's  Minds.     According  to  your 
Notions   of  things,   the  Hurons  are   likewife    foolirn   in   not 
minding  the  lofs  of  a  Maiden-head  in  the  Girls  they  take  in 
Marriage,   and    in   [178]   condefcending  to   marry  the  very 
Women  that  their  own  Companions  have  turn'd  off:    But 
prithee  tell  me,  Brother,  are  the  French  the  wifer  for  fancying 
that  a  Girl  is  a  Maid  becaufe  me  cries  and  fwears  'tis  fo? 
Nay,  fuppofing  her  to  be  a  true  Maid,  is  the  Conqueft  the 
greater?     No,  fure,  on  the  contrary  the  Husband  is  oblig'd 
to  teach  her  a  Trade  that  fhe'll  pra&ife  with  others  at  a  time 
when  he  is  not  in  a  condition  to  continue  the  daily  Exercife. 
As  for  our  marrying  Women  feparated  from  former  Hus- 
bands, is  not  that  the  fame  thing  as  marrying  a  Widow,  with 
this  difference  only,  that  our  Women  have  all  reafon  to  be 
perfwaded   that  we  Love   'em,  whereas  your  Widows    have 
reafon  to  believe  that  you  marry  their  Riches  rather  than  their 
Perfons.     How  many  Families   are    reduc'd   to   diforder   or 
Ruin  by  fuch  Marriages  with  Widows?     But  after  all  you  do 
not  pretend  to  redrefs  fuch  diforders,  becaufe  the  evil  is  incur- 
able as  long  as  the  Conjugal  Tye  lafts  for  Life.     Once  more, 


to  North- America.  613 

I'll  take  the  liberty  to  mention  another  piece  of  Madnefs 
praclis'd  among  you,  which  indeed  is  down  right  Cruelty  to 
my  Mind.  Your  Marriages  are  indiffolvable,  and  yet  a 
Youth  and  a  Girl  that  burn  in  the  mutual  flames  of  Love, 
can't  marry  without  the  confent  of  their  Parents.  Both  the 
one  and  the  other  muft  marry  who  their  Fathers  pleafe,  in 
oppofition  to  their  own  Inclination,  tho'  their  Averfion  to  the 
Perfon  propos'd  be  fo  great,  that  they  hate  him  mortally. 
The  inequality  of  Age,  Eftate  and  Birth  is  the  fource  of  all 
thefe  Inconveniences ;  they  overrule  the  mutual  Love  of  the 
two  Parties  that  like  one  another.  What  Cruelty !  What 
Tyranny  I  and  that  praclis'd  by  a  Father  upon  his  own  Chil- 
dren. Do  you  meet  with  fuch  things  among  the  Hurons  ? 
Among  them  [179]  every  one's  as  Rich  and  as  Noble  as  his 
Neighbour ;  the  Women  are  entitled  to  the  fame  Liberty  with 
the  Men,  and  the  Children  enjoy  the  fame  Privileges  with 
their  Fathers.  A  young  Huron  may  marry  one  of  his  Mother's 
Slaves,  and  neither  Father  nor  Mother  are  impower'd  to 
hinder  him.  This  Slave  by  fo  doing  becomes  a  free  Woman ; 
and  fince  her  Beauty  pleafes,  why  mould  not  the  Youth  prefer 
her  to  the  great  General's  Daughter  that  is  not  fo  handfome? 
To  continue  the  faults  of  your  Conftitution :  Is  it  not  a  piece 
of  Injuftice  among  you  who  abhor  a  community  of  Goods, 
that  a  Nobleman  or  Gentleman  mould  give  his  eldeft  Son 
almoft  all  that  he  has,  and  force  the  other  Brethren  and  Sifters 
to  reft  fatisfied  with  a  Trifle,  tho'  perhaps  that  eldeft  Son  is 
not  a  Lawful  Child,  and  all  the  reft  are?  The  Confequence 
of  this  is,  that  they  throw  their  Daughters  into  perpetual 


614  Some  New  Voyages 

Prifons,  with  a  fort  of  Barbarity  which  is  not  fuitable  to  the 
Chriftian  Charity  that  the  Jefuits  preach  up.  As  for  the 
other  Sons,  they  are  forc'd  to  turn  Priefts  and  Monks,  in 
order  to  live  by  the  fine  Trade  of  praying  to  God  againft 
their  will,  of  preaching  what  they  do  not  practife,  and  of  per- 
fuading  others  into  the  belief  of  what  they  disbelieve  them- 
felves.  If  any  of  'em  take  up  a  Military  Profeflion,  they 
defign  the  pillaging  the  Nation  more  than  the  guarding  off 
her  Enemies.  The  French  do  not  fight  for  the  Intereft  of 
their  Country  as  we  do ;  'tis  their  own  Intereft  and  prefer- 
ment to  higher  Pofts  that  they  have  in  view.  The  Love  of 
their  Country  and  of  their  Fellow-Citizens  does  not  prevail 
fo  much  with  them  as  Vanity,  Ambition  and  Riches.  In  fine, 
my  dear  Brother,  I  conclude  this  Difcourfe  in  affuring  thee, 
That  the  Chriftians  Self-love  is  a  piece  of  Folly  that  [180]  the 
Hurons  will  ever  condemn ;  and  that  Folly  which  tinctures  all 
your  Actions  is  remarkable  in  a  diftinguifhing  manner  in  the 
way  of  your  Amours  and  Marriages ;  which,  I  muft  fay,  is  as 
unaccountable  as  the  People  are  who  fuffer  themfelves  to  be 
catch'd  in  that  Noofe. 

Lahontan.  Adario,  you  remember  I  fet  forth  before,  that 
the  Actions  of  Rogues  are  no  Standard  for  thofe  of  honourable 
Men.  I  own  the  Juftnefs  of  your  Cenfure  as  to  fome  Actions, 
which  we  alfo  difallow  of.  I  acknowledge  that  the  diftinction 
of  Property  is  the  fource  of  an  infinity  of  Paflions,  of  which 
you  are  clear'd.  But  if  you  take  things  by  the  right  handle, 
efpecially  our  way  of  making  Love  and  Marrying,  the  good 
order  of  our  Families,  and  the  Education  of  our  Children, 


to  North- America.  615 

you'l  find  a  wonderful  Conduct  in  all  our  Conftitutions. 
That  Liberty  which  the  Hurons  preach  up  occafions  difmal 
Diforders.  In  their  way  the  Children  are  Matters  as  well  as 
the  Fathers ;  and  Wives  who  ought  naturally  to  be  fubject  to 
their  Husbands  are  inverted  with  an  equal  Authority.  The 
Daughters  fcorn  the  Advice  of  their  Mothers  when  there's  a 
Lover  in  the  cafe.  In  a  Word,  all  this  fcene  of  Liberty 
reduces  the  way  of  Life  to  a  continued  courfe  of  Debauchery, 
by  granting  to  Nature,  in  Imitation  of  the  Brutes,  an  unlim- 
ited fatisfa&ion  to  all  its  Demands.  Your  fingle  Women 
place  their  Wifdom  in  concerting  and  concealing  their  lewd 
Adventures.  To  run  with  *  a  Match  in  *;  e  to  mUr  int0  a 
your  Villages,  is  the  fame  thing  as  ftrolling  Woman's  Apartment 
after  a  Whore  in  ours.  All  your  young  in  the  Night  time 
Men  roll  from  Hut  to  Hut  upon  fuch  with  a  Ughu 
Adventures  while  the  Night  lafts.  The  Doors  of  every  Girls 
Chambers  are  open  to  all  Guefts,  [181]  and  if  a  young  Man 
comes  that  (he  does  not  like  me  pulls  the  covering  over  her 
Head,  the  meaning  of  which  is,  that  me  is  Proof  againft  his 
Temptation :  But  if  another  comes,  perhaps  (he  fuffers  him 
to  fit  down  on  the  Foot  of  her  Bed,  in  order  to  a  dry  Con- 
ference, without  going  farther ;  that  is  to  fay,  (he  has  a  mind 
to  make  a  fetter  of  this  poor  Fellow,  that  fhe  may  have  feveral 
Strings  to  her  Bow.  In  comes  a  third,  whom  fhe  jilts  with 
more  refined  Politicks,  and  allows  to  lye  near  her  upon  the 
Coverings  of  the  Bed.  But  when  this  Spark  is  gone,  in 
comes  a  fourth,  to  whofe  Embraces  fhe  readily  grants  her 
Bed,  and  her  fpreading  Arms,  for  two  or  three  Hours  to- 


616  Some  New  Voyages 

gether;  and  tho'  he  is  far  from  triffling  away  the  time  in 
empty  Words,  yet  the  World  takes  it  to  be  fo.  Behold,  my 
dear  Adario,  the  Lewdnefs  of  the  Hurons,  difguis'd  with  a 
Pretext  of  honeft  Converfation,  and  that  fo  much  the  more 
that  how  indifcreet  fo  ever  any  of  their  Gallants  may  be  to 
their  Miftreffes  (which  rarely  happens)  the  World  is  fo  far 
from  giving  Credit  to  'em,  that  they  brand  'em  with  Jealoufie, 
which  amongft  you  is  a  defamatory  Affront.  This  being 
premis'd,  'tis  no  wonder  that  the  Americans  won't  hear  any 
thing  of  Amours  in  the  Day  time,  upon  the  Plea  that  the 
Night  was  made  for  that  purpofe.  In  France  this  way  of 
Intreguing  is  term'd  Cacher  adroitment  Son  jeu,  dexteroufly  to 
conceal  ones  Defigns.  If  there's  any  thing  of  Wantonnefs 
and  Debauchery  amongft  our  Wenches,  there  is  at  leaft  this 
difference,  that  the  Rule  is  not  General,  as  it  is  amongft 
yours ;  and  befides  they  don't  go  fo  brutifhly  to  work  with  it. 
The  Amours  of  the  European  Women  are  Charming,  they  are 
Conftant  and  Faithful  to  Death,  and  when  they  are  fo  weak 
as  to  yield  to  a  Lover  the  laft  Favours,  they  have  a  greater 
[182]  regard  to  their  inward  Merit  than  to  an  outward  Ap- 
perance ;  and  'tis  not  the  gratifying  of  their  own  Paflion  that 
they  have  fo  much  in  view,  as  the  defire  of  giving  their  Lovers 
fenfible  Proofs  of  their  Affection.  The  French  Gallants  feek 
to  pleafe  their  Miftreffes  by  Methods  that  are  altogether 
agreeable,  as  by  Refpecl:,  Attendance,  and  Complaifance ; 
they  are  Patient,  Paffionate,  and  always  ready  to  Sacrifice  their 
Lives  and  Fortunes  for  'em.  They  lye  fighing  a  long  time 
before  they  dare  to  attempt  any  thing,  for  they  are  refolv'd 


to  North- America.  617 

to  merit  the  laft  Favour  by  long  Services  ;  they  are  feen  upon 
their  Knees  at  their  Miftreffes  Feet,  to  beg  the  priviledge  of 
kitting  the  Hand ;  and  as  a  Dog  follows  his  Mafter,  watching 
over  him  when  he  Sleeps,  fo  'mongft  us,  a  true  Lover  ne'er 
quits  his  Miftrefs,  nor  muts  his  Eyes,  but  that  he  may  dream 
of  her  in  his  Sleep.  If  any  one  is  found  fo  hot  upon't  as 
bluntly  to  Embrace  his  Miftrefs  upon  the  very  firft  occafion, 
without  any  regard  to  her  Weaknefs,  he  paffes  with  us  under 
the  Character  of  a  Savage,  that  is  to  fay,  a  meer  Clown,  that 
begins  where  others  leave  off. 

Adario.  Ho,  ho,  my  dear  Brother ;  are  the  French  e're  a 
whit  the  wifer  for  calling  this  fort  of  People  Savage?  In 
truth,  I  did  not  believe  that  Word  fignify'd  with  you,  a  Pru- 
dent thinking  Man.  I'm  glad  with  all  my  Heart  at  this 
piece  of  News,  not  doubting  but  one  Day  you  may  give  the 
name  of  Savage  to  all  the  French,  who  will  be  wife  enough  to 
follow  exactly  the  true  Rules  of  Juftice  and  Reafon.  Now 
the  Myftery  is  unriddled  that  prompts  the  cunning  French 
Women  to  have  fuch  a  Love  for  Savage  Creatures  ;  they're 
not  fo  much  to  blame  for't,  for  in  my  mind,  Time  is  too 
precious  to  lofe,  and  Youth  too  fhort  not  to  make  the  beft 
of  the  Advantages  [183]  it  throws  in  our  Laps.  If  your 
Wenches  are  Conftant  in  a  continual  change  of  Lovers,  that 
may  bear  fome  refemblance  to  the  Humour  of  our  Girls  ;  but 
when  they  faithfully  yield  themfelves  to  be  Carefs'd  by  three 
or  four  at  a  time,  that's  altogether  different  from  the  Temper 
of  the  Hurons.  May  the  French  Gallants  fpend  their  Lives 
in  the  Fooleries  you  fpoke  of  but   now,  to  conquer  their 


618  Some  New  Voyages 

Miftreffes  ;  may  they  fpend  their  time  and  their  Eftates  in 
purchafing  a  fmall  Pleafure,  ufher'd  in  by  a  thoufand  Troubles 
and  Cares.  I  fhan't  offer  to  blame  them,  becaufe  I  have  play'd 
the  fool  my  felf,  in  running  the  rifque  of  Traverfing,  in  fuch 
foolifh  Veffels,  the  rough  Seas  that  feparate  France  from  this 
Continent,  to  have  the  pleafure  of  feeing  the  Country  of  the 
French.  This  obliges  me  to  hold  my  Peace ;  but  reafonable 
People  will  fay,  That  your  Amorous  Crew  are  as  foolifh  as  I, 
but  with  this  difference,  that  their  Love  paffes  blindly  from 
one  Miftrefs  to  another,  and  expofes  'em  to  the  repetition  of 
the  fame  Torments ;  whereas  I  fhall  never  take  another  Trip 
from  America  to  France. 


[i85]      AN 

APPENDIX. 

Containing  Some  New 

VOYAGES 

TO 

Portugal  and  Denmark. 


LETTER   I. 

Dated  at  Lisbon,  April  20.  1694. 
Containing  a  Defcription  of  Viana,  Porto  a  Porto,  Aveiro,  Coim- 
bra,  Lisbon;  together  with  a  View  of  the  Court  of  Portugal; 
and  an  Account  of  the  Government,  Laws,  Cuftoms,  Com- 
merce and  Humours  of  the  Portuguefe. 

SIR, 

I  BEGIN  my  letter  with  that  ancient  faying  ;  Una  falus  vittis 
Millam  fperare  falutem ;  my  meaning  is,  that  after  the  receipt 
of  fome  bad  News  relating  to  my  bufinefs,  I  find  I  have  Spirit 
enough  to  brave  all  the  Jolts  of  Fortune.  The  Univerfe  which 
Swallows  and  Jefuits  [186]  take  for  their  Country,  muft  like- 
wife  be  mine ;  till  fuch  time  as  it  pleafes  God  to  fend  to  the 
other  World,  fome  Perfons  that  do  him  very  little  Service  here. 


620  Some  New  Voyages 

I  am  glad  my  Memoirs  of  Canada  pleafe  you,  and  that  my 
Savage  Style  did  not  turn  your  Affe&ion :  Tho'  after  all,  you 
have  no  reafon  to  criticife  upon  my  Jargon,  for  both  you  and 
I  are  of  a  Country,  where  no  body  can  fpeak  French  but  when 
they  are  not  able  to  open  their  Mouths :   Befides,  'twas  not 
poffible  for  me  who  went  fo  young  to  America,  to  find  out 
in  that  Country,  the  Myftery  of  Writing  Politely.     That's  a 
Science  that  is  not  to  be  learn'd  among  the  Savages,  whofe 
Clownifh  Society  is  enough  to  faften  a  brutifh  twang  upon  the 
Politeft  Man  in  the  World.     Since  you  prefs  me  to  continue 
my  Accounts  of  what  new  things  I  meet  with,  I  willingly 
comply  with  your   defire ;    but   you   muft   not  expect  thofe 
nice  Defcriptions  you  fpeak  of,  for  if  I  pretended  to  any 
fuch  thing,  I  mould  expofe  my  felf  to  the  Derifion  of  thofe 
to  whom  you  may  fhew  my  Letters.     I  am  not  fufficiently 
qualify'd  to  outdo  the  curious  Remarks  that  an  infinity  of 
Travellers  have  publim'd.     'Tis  enough  for  me  if  I  furnifh 
you  with  fome  private  Memoirs  of  fome  things   that  other 
Travellers  have  Wav'd,  as  being  beneath  their  regard :  And 
for  as  much  as  thefe  Memoirs  treat  of  fuch  Subjects  as  were 
never  yet  handled  in  Print,  you  will  meet  with  fome  Satis- 
faction upon  the  fcore  of  their  Novelty.     With  this  View,  I 
mall  be  very  punctual  in  Writing  to  you  from  time  to  time, 
from  whatever  corner  of  the  World  my  Misfortunes  may  lead 
me  to ;  but  upon  this  condition,  that  you  fhall  take  an  exacl; 
care  to  let  me  have  your  Anfwers.     In  the  mean  time,  I  muft 
acquaint  you  that  I  can't  undertake  to  Frenchify   [187]  the 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  621 

Foreign  Names ;  and  therefore  mail  Write  'em  as  the  People 

of  the  Country  do,  leaving  it  to  you  to  pronounce  'em  as  you 

pleafe. 

You  remember  I  Writ  to  you  about  ten  Weeks  ago,  that 

upon  laying  down  three  hundred  Piftoles  to  the  Captain  of 

the  Ship  that  brought  me  from  Placentia  to  Viana,  I  had  the 

good  luck  to  get  a  Shoar  there ;    and  fo  I  (hall  refume  the 

thread  of  my  Journal,  from  that  place  where  I  laft  took  leave 

of  it.     I  had  no  fooner  jump'd  out  of  the  Sloop,  than  a  French 

Gentleman,  who  has  ferv'd  the  King  of  Portugal  thefe  four 

and  thirty  years  t  in  the  quality  of  a  Captain 

of  Horfe,  came  and  offer'd  me  the  ufe  of  his     f  Since    Mon- 
__       .      ,       .        ,  .  ,         ,  ....       fieur  de  Schom- 

Houle,  for  in  that   place  there  s  no   pubhck     ^ere'*  t- 

Houfes  but  fuch  as  are  Calculated  for  com- 
mon Seamen.  The  next  day  this  old  Officer  advis'd  me  to  go 
and  wait  upon  Don  John  of  Souza,  Governour  General  of  the 
Province  between  the  Douro  and  the  Minho.  He  acquainted 
me  farther,  that  every  body  gave  him  the  Title  of  L'  Excel- 
lentia ;  and  that  he  gave  the  Title  of  Senoria  only  to  the 
Gentlemen  of  the  firft  Rank,  and  *  Merced  to 

all  the  reft.      When  I   heard   this,  I  chofe  in-     **  Title  fome- 
n       .      -  e       .  .         0        .n  ,.  ,  c        what     higher 

ftead  of  lpeaking  dpanijh  to  him,  to  make  ul-e       ,       y 

of  an  Interpreter,  who  Metamorphos'd  all  the 

You's  of  my  Compliment  into  a  Portuguefe  Excellentia. 

Viana  lies  five  Leagues  to  the  Weftward  of  Braga,  and  is 

inclos'd   in  a  Right-Angle  made  by  the  Sea  and  the  River 

Lima.     Here  I  faw  two  Monasteries  of  Beneditline  Nuns,  which 


622  Some  New  Voyages 

were  fo  ill  provided  that  they  would  Starve  for  Hunger,  if 

their  Relations   and   ||  Devoto's   did  not  affift 

Wi.e.tbofewbo     >em      Upon  the  Sea  Side  there  ftands  a  very 

ave  a  rejpe  ^  Cattle,  Fortified  after  Count  Pagan's  way : 

for  the   Nuns.      &  '  d 

'Tis  covered   [188]  with  feveral  large  Culver- 

ines,  which  guard  off  the  Sallymen  from  Attacking  the  Veffels 

that  lye  at  Anchor  in  the  Road.     In  this  Road,  the  Ships  are 

Shelter'd  from   the  fourteen  Points  of  the  Wind,  that  lye 

between  North  and  South,  in  by  Eaft.    The 

P, .'   '     ,a     .     .   .     River  is  a  havre  de  barre,  or  *  Bar-Haven, 

Ship  can  t  enter  but  ' 

at  full  Sea;  for  fear  which  no  Ship  ventures  upon  without  call- 

of  touching  the  Sands  }ng  out  Pilots,  by  a  Signal  of  a  Gun  or  a 

or  Flats.    Bayonne,  FJ       twifted  round.     The  Ships  come  all 

Bilbao,    Stona,    Vi-  .  TT.    ,    __,  .      ,  ,      r^.  , 

t>   *    j„,o^,n      m  at  High  Water,  and  when  the  Tide  runs 
ana,  rorto,Aveirco,  °  ' 

Mondego,  and  Lis-  out  are  left  dry,  unlefs  they  Ride  upon  the 
bon,  are  all  Havres  Pit,  which  has  always  eight  or  ten  Fathom 
de  Barre.  at  1qw  Water< 

Febr.  4.  I  hir'd  two  Mules,  one  for  my  felf  and  another 
for  my  Man,  at  the  rate  of  three  Spanijh  Piafters  or  Cobs; 
and  put  on  fo  briskly  that  I  arriv'd  that  Night  at  Porto  a  Porto, 
which  was  twelve  Leagues  off.  Thefe  Creatures  Amble  both 
faft  and  fmoothly,  without  Stumbling  or  tyring  the  Rider. 
Your  Cavaliers  have  the  conveniency  of  refting  themfelves 
when  they  will  upon  the  Portmantles  which  are  faften'd  to 
two  Iron  Rings  at  the  Pummel  of  the  Saddle.  The  Saddles 
of  that  Country  are  too  hard  for  fuch  a  Lean  Man  as  me. 
The  Road  between  Viana  and  Porto  a  Porto  is  Stony,  but 
pretty  good ;  the  Ground  lies  upon  a  Level,  the  Profpecl  is 


>3/..a 


J  hen- 
*A(hil>    tall'd  (affe-tttc 


4<  W?Ai* 
..&  & 

.diavaqe  taken  t«  War  arid 
burnt  bit  flu  EiuniL:.' 


<d ivomtui  tiiat  condemns  to  death   .? 
arUaner  that  u  ciivcn  her 


iSacaye  Shot 


Tnt  Jeatinq  of  the  prt/oner-j  tTuu 
arc  jondeirin './  t/die 


»  I  ivonicin  tfi.it  qtve*i  a 
ori/ojter  /us  /i/e 

Ifte  Jauciffej  returnme/ 

to  the  n/A^,*  .  *•  I/- ":/>  £k  i-l=;  ^ 


'«?< 


<  sf-  - 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark. 


623 


pleafant,  and  the  Sea  Side  is  adorn'd  with  feveral  large  Vil- 
lages, the  chief  of  which  are  Expofende,  Faons,  and  Villa  de 
Conde.  When  I  arriv'd  at  Porto,  my  Guide  carry'd  me  to  an 
EngHJh  Inn,  the  only  one  that  was  fit  to  entertain  Gentlemen. 
This  City  is  cramm'd  with  French,  Englifli  and  Dutch  Mer- 
chants, [189]  who  croud  thither  upon  the  account  of  the 
Commerce ;  tho'  the  latter  have  fuffer'd  by't  fufficiently,  fince 
the  beginning  of  the  War,  by  vertue  of  the  Civility  of  our 
Privateers,  who  make  no  fcruple  to  take  their  Ships.  Porto 
ftands  upon  the  declivity  of  a  Steep  Hill,  the  Foot  of  which 
is  Warn  d  by  the  River  Douro,  that  falls  into  the  Sea  a  League 
lower  upon  a  \Barr.  This  Bar  which 
lies  in  the  Mouth  of  the  Douro,  is  fo 
fufpected  by  Sailors,  that  they  never 
approach  to  it,  but  when  the  Weather 
is  good,  and  when  they  have  fome  of 
the  Pilots  of  the  Country  on  Board ; 
for  upon  the  Sand  of  the  Bar  there 
are  Rocks,  fome  hidden  and  fome 
feen,  which  render  it  inacceflible  to 
Strangers.  A  Ship  of  four  hundred 
Tun  may  come  over  exactly  at  high 
Water ;  which  is  punctually  the  time 
that  any  Ship  ought  to  make  this 
River.  Here  we  fee  a  fine  Key  reach- 
ing from  one  end  of  the  Town  to 
the  other,  upon  which  every  Veffel  is 
Lafh'd  over  againft  the  owners  Doors.     In  this  River,  I  had 


*A  Bar,  properly  /peaking, 
is  a  Bank  of  Sand,  which 
commonly  runs  acro/s  the 
Mouth  of  the  Rivers  that 
have  not  afufficient  Rapid- 
ity to  throw  back  into  the 
Sea  the  Sands  that  are  caft  in 
upon  'em,  when  the  Winds 
blow  hard  from  the  Main. 
JUBars  may  be  call' d Banks 
of  Sand;  for  I  never  heard 
of  a  Bar  confifting  of  a  ridge 
of  Rocks.  Now  this  Sand 
rifes  nearer  to  the  Surface 
of  the  Water,  like  a  little 
Hill  in  a  Plain,  fo  that 
Ships  can't  get  over  it  but 
at  high  Water. 


624  Some  New  Voyages 

the  opportunity  of  viewing  the  Brafil  Fleet,  confifting  of 
thirty  two  Portuguefe  Merchantmen,  the  leaft  of  which  carry'd 
two  and  twenty  Guns.  I  faw  likewife  feveral  Foreign  Ships, 
and  particularly  five  or  fix  French  Privateers,  that  put  in  there 
to  Buy  Provifions  and  Ammunition. 

Porto  is  a  Stately  fine  City,  and  well  Pav'd ;  but  its  Scitua- 
tion  upon  a  Mountain  is  inconvenient,  [190]  in  regard  that  it 
obliges  one  to  be  always  upon  the  Afcent  or  Defcent.  The 
Gallery  of  the  Regular  Canons  of  St.  Juftin's  is  as  curious  a 
piece  of  Architecture  for  its  uncommon  length,  as  their 
Church  is  with  refpect  to  the  roundnefs  of  its  Figure,  and 
the  Riches  of  the  infide.  In  this  City  they  have  a  Parliament, 
a  Bimoprick,  Academies  for  the  Exercifes  of  young  Gentle- 
men, and  an  Arfenal  for  the  fitting  out  of  the  Men  of  War, 
that  are  Built  every  year  near  the  Mouth  of  the  River.  I 
wonder  that  this  Town  is  not  better  Fortified,  efpecially  con- 
fidering  'tis  the  Second  City  in  Portugal.  Its  Walls  are  fix 
Foot  thick,  and  at  certain  diftances  fhew  us  the  Ruines  of  old 
Towers  that  time  has  levell'd  with  the  Ground.  They  were 
built  by  the  Moors,  and  are  the  raoft  irregular  piece  of  Work 
that  thofe  times  produc'd :  So  that  you  may  eafily  guefs 
whether  'twould  be  any  hard  matter  to  take  this  Town  at  the 
firft  Attack. 

'Tis  well  for  the  Portuguefe  that  this  Province,  which  is  one 
of  the  beft  in  Portugal,  is  almoft  inacceflible  to  their  Enemies 
whether  by  Sea  or  Land;  the  Sea  Side  being  guarded  by 
Barrs,  and  the  Land  by  impracticable  Mountains.     'Tis  very 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  625 

Populous,  and  all  its  Valleys  which  are  full  of  Towns  and  Vil- 
lages, afford  great  quantities  of  Wine  and  Olives,  and  feed 
numerous  Flocks  of  Cattel,  the  Wool  of  which  is  pretty  fine. 
This  I  Write  upon  the  Information  of  fome  French  Merchants, 
who  are  perfectly  well  acquainted  with  this  Province.  I  am 
told  that  'tis  impoffible  to  make  the  Douro  Navigable,  by 
reafon  of  the  Water-Falls  and  Currents  that  run  between  the 
prodigious  Rocks.  This,  Sir,  is  all  I  know  of  the  matter;  fo 
I  hope  you'll  content  your  felf  with  it. 

[191]  The  10th  I  fet  out  for  Lisbon  in  a  Sedan,  which  I 
Hir'd  for  eighteen  thoufand  fix  hundred  Reys,  a  number  of 
pieces  that  are  enough  to  frighten  thofe  who  do  not  know 
that  they  are  but  Deniers.  Since  the  Portuguefe  State  all  their 
Accounts  in  this  faffiion ;  I  muft  acquaint  you  that  a  Rey  is 
nothing  elfe  but  a  Denier,  or  the  nth  part  of  a  Penny;  and 
that  this  numerous  quantity  of  Pieces  amounts  to  no  more 
than  twenty  five  Piaftres.  My  Litter-Man  ingag'd  for  this 
Fare  to  fet  me  down  at  Lisbon,  on  the  ninth  day  of  March; 
tho'  at  the  fame  time,  he  was  oblig'd  to  go  two  or  three 
Leagues  out  of  his  way,  to  fatisfie  the  Curiofity  I  had  to  pafs 
by  the  way  of  Aveiro,  where  I  arriv'd  the  next  day. 

Aveiro  is  a  paltry  little  Town  Seated  on  the  Sea  Side,  and 
upon  the  Banks  of  a  little  River,  Guarded  by  a  Bar,  which  the 
Ships  that  draw  under  nine  or  ten  foot  Water,  crofs  at  High 
Water  by  the  direction  of  the  Coafting  Pilots.  'Tis  Fortified 
after  the  Moorifli  way,  as  well  as  Porto.  In  this  place,  there's 
as  much  Salt  made  as  will  ferve  two  or  three  Provinces.     'Tis 

40 


626  Some  New  Voyages 

adorn'd  with  a  pretty  Monaftrey  of  Nuns,  who  give  proof 

,  .        .     .       ~,   .„.  of  their  ancient  Nobility  and  Origin 

Ti.  e.  Ancient  Chnftians,  y  Jf 

a  great  Title  of  Honour  in  from  the  t  Chriftiaon  Veilho.  The 
that  Country,  by  rea/on  of  Country  gives  a  moft  pleafant  Prof- 
its  being  uncommon.  peft  for  three  Leagues  to  the  Eaft- 

ward ;  that  is,  to  the  great  Lisbon  Road,  which  is  Hemm'd 
in  by  a  ridge  of  Mountains  from  Porto  to  Coimbra. 

The  14//6  I  arriv'd  at  Coimbra  ;  and  when  I  talk'd  of  Seeing 
the  Univerfity,  my  Sedan  Man  told  me  that  this  piece  of 
Curiofity  would  ftop  me  for  a  whole  day:  So  that  I  can 
only  tell  you  that  this  Univerfity  you  find  mention'd  in  fome 
Travels,  is  render'd  Famous  by  the  King  of  Portugal's  [192] 
Efforts,  ever  fince  his  Acceflion  to  the  Throne,  to  make  all 
Sciences  flourifh  within  its  Walls.  The  Town  affords  nothing 
that's  very  remarkable,  unlefs  it  be  a  double  Stone  Bridge, 
one  above  another,  between  which  one  may  crofs  the  River 
without  being  feen  ;  and  two  fine  Convents,  one  for  Monks, 
and  another  for  Nuns,  lying  at  the  diftance  of  fourty  or 
fifty  Paces  from  one  another.  Coimbra  bears  the  Title  of  a 
Dutchy,  and  is  Intitled  to  feveral  confiderable  Prerogatives. 
It  ftands  fix  Leagues  off  the  Sea,  at  the  Foot  of  a  Steep  Hill, 
upon  which  you  may  fee  the  Churches  and  Monaftries,  and 
two  or  three  fine  Houfes.  The  Bifhoprick  of  this  place 
which  is  Suffragran  to  Braga,  is  one  of  the  beft  Bifhopricks  in 
Portugal.  The  Road  from  Coimbra  to  Lisbon  is  Pleafant,  and 
affords  a  pretty  Profpecl ;  the  Country  is  pretty  well  Peopled. 
I  arriv'd  at  Lisbon  the  Metropolis  of  this  Country  on  the 
iStb,  and  was  not  near  fo  tyr'd  as  I  was  uneafy  in  making  ufe 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  627 

of  that  flow  way  of  Travelling  which  can  fuit  none  but  Ladies 
and  old  Fellows.  I  had  better  have  hir'd  Mules,  for  then  I 
might  have  gone  through  in  five  days  time,  and  that  for  a  very 
fmall  Charge ;  viz.  thirteen  Piafters  for  me  and  my  Servant. 
In  the  mean  time,  give  me  leave  to  tell  you  by  the  bye,  that 
your  tender  Sparks  would  never  be  able  to  bear  the  incon- 
veniency  of  the  Pofada's  (or  Inns)  upon  the  Road :  They  have 
fuch  forry  pitiful  Accommodation,  that  the  very  Defcription  of 
'em  would  be  enough  to  fcare  you  from  going  to  Lisbon,  tho' 
you  had  never  fo  much  bufinefs  there.  However  I  was  as 
well  fatisfied,  as  if  they  had  been  the  beft  Inns  in  France;  for 
having  fpent  the  whole  courfe  of  my  Life  in  Scouring  the  Sea, 
the  Lakes,  and  the  Rivers  of  Canada,  and  having  liv'd  for  the 
moft  part  upon  Roots  and  Water,  [193]  with  a  Bark  Tent  for 
my  Canopy ;  I  eat  heartily  of  all  that  they  fet  before  me. 
You  muft  know,  Sir,  the  Landlord  conduces  the  Paffengers  to 
a  bye  place  that  looks  more  like  a  Dungeon  than  a  Chamber; 
and  there  you  muft  ftay  with  a  great  deal  of  patience,  till  he 
fends  you  fome  Ragou's  Seafon'd  with  Garlick,  Pepper,  Chib- 
bols,  and  a  hundred  Medicinal  Herbs,  the  fmell  of  which 
would  turn  an  Iroquefe's  Stomach.  To  compleat  the  nicety  of 
your  Entertainment,  you  muft  lye  down  upon  Quilts  or  Mat- 
treffes  fpread  out  on  Planks,  without  either  Straw  or  Cover- 
lets ;  and  thefe  Mattreffes  are  no  thicker  than  this  Letter,  fo 
that  'twould  require  two  or  three  hundred  of  'em  to  make 
your  Bed  fofter  than  Stones.  'Tis  true,  the  Landlord  finds 
you  as  many  Quilts  as  you  pleafe  for  a  Penny  a  piece,  and 
takes  the  pains  to  (hake  'em  down,  and  beat  off  the  Flea's, 


628  Some  New  Voyages 

Bugs,  &c.  But  thank  God,  I  had  no  occafion  to  make  ufe  of 
'em,  for  I  ftill  kept  my  Hammock,  which  was  eafily  hung  up 
in  any  place  I  came  to,  by  two  large  Iron  Hooks.  But  after 
all,  the  account  I  now  give  you  of  the  Portnguefe  Inns,  is  all  a 
Jeft  in  comparifon  with  the  Spanijh,  if  we  may  credit  Men  of 
Reputation :  And  that  I  take  to  be  the  reafon  that  Travellers 
pay  little  or  nothing  for  their  Fare  either  in  the  one  or  the 
other. 

The  next  day  after  my  Arrival  at  Lisbon,  I  waited  upon  the 
Abbot  d'Eftrees ;  whom  the  K.  of  Portugal  has  a  great  refpect 
for,  and  who  is  fo  much  efteem'd  by  every  body,  that  they 
juftly  give  him  the  Title  of  '0  Mais  Perfeito  dos  Perfeitos 
Cavalheiros,  i.  e.  The  mofl  Accomplijh'd  of  the  moft  Accomplijh'd 
Gentlemen.  His  Equipage  is  Magnificent  enough,  tho'  he  has 
not  yet  made  his  publick  Entry.  His  Family  is  kept  in  excel- 
lent Order;  his  Houfe  is  very  well  Furnifh'd,  and  his  [194] 
Table  is  nice  and  well  ferv'd.  Oftentimes  he  entertains  the 
Perfons  of  Note,  who  would  not  vifit  him,  if  he  did  not  give 
'em  the  Precedency.  This  piece  of  deference  would  have 
feem'd  ridiculous,  if  the  King  his  Matter  had  not  order'd  it 

to  be  fo  in  Mr.  D'Opede's  *  time :  For  it 
*  He  was  formerly  Jm-     looks  odd  fcQ  fe£  th(J  m£aneft  £n. 

bajj odour  at  this  Court.  . 

fign  in  the  Army  take  the  Right  hand 

of  an  Ambaffadour,  who  denys  that  Precedency  to  all  the  Min- 

ifters  of  the   Second   Rate.      The  Portuguefe  Noblemen  and 

Gentlemen  are  Men  of  Honour  and  Honefty,  but  they  are 

fo  full  of  themfelves  that  they  fancy  themfelves  the  Pureft  and 

Ancienteft    Stock   of    Nobility   and   Gentry   in   the  World. 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  629 

Thofe  of  diftinguifhing  Titles  expect  your  Excellency  for  their 

Compellation ;  and  they  are  fo  tender  of  their  Dignity,  that 

they  never  vifit  any  one  that  lodges  in  a  publick  Houfe.    None 

but  Perfons  of  an  Illuftrious  Birth  are 

dignify'd  with  the  Title  of  t Don;  for     \Th'  W°Trd  is  exa6lly  of 

the  fame  Importance  with 
the  mod  honourable  Pofts  can't  Intitle     Meffire,   and   with   the 

'em  to  that  Venerable  Character ;  info-     Spanifh,   Sire  or  Sieur, 

much  that  the  Secretary  of  State,  who     whkh  the  Coblers,  &c. 

is  poflefs'd  of  one  of  the  greateft  Pofts 

in  the  Kingdom,  do's  not  pretend  to  affume  it. 

The  King  of  Portugal  is  of  a  large  Stature,  and  well  Made; 
he  has  a  very  good  Meen,  tho'  his  Complexion  is  fomewhat 
Brown.1  'Tis  faid,  he  is  as  conftant  in  his  Refolutions,  as  in 
his  Friendfhip.  He  is  perfectly  well  acquainted  with  the 
State  of  his  Country.  He  is  fo  Liberal  and  full  of  Bounty, 
that  he  can  fcarce  refufe  his  Subjects  the  Favours  they  ask. 
The  Duke  of  Cadaval  his  firft  Minifter  and  Favourite  has 
potent  Enemies;  [195]  upon  the  account  that  he  appears 
more  Zealous  for  his  Mafter  than  the  other  Courtiers ;  and 
at  the  fame  time,  more  hearty  for  the  French  Intereft. 

The  Situation  and  various  Profpects  of  Lisbon  would  Entitle 
it  to  the  Character  of  one  of  the  fineft  Cities  in  Europe,  if  it 
were  not  fo  very  nafty.  It  ftands  upon  feven  Mountains,  from 
whence  you  have  a  View  of  the  fineft  Land-Skip  in  the  World, 
as  well  as  of  the  Sea,  the  River  Taio,  and  the  Forts  that  guard 
the  Mouth  of  the  River.     This  Mountainous  City  puts  the 


1The  king  of  Portugal  was  Pedro  II  of  the  house  of  Braganza  ;  born  in  1648,  he 
succeeded  his  brother  as  Icing  in  1683,  and  reigned  until  his  death  in  1706.  —  Ed. 


630  Some  New  Voyages 

People  to  a  great  inconvenience,  that  are  forced  to  walk  on 
foot ;  but  this  inconvenience  affects  Strangers  and  Travellers 
moft,  whofe  Curiofity  is  in  fome  meafure  thwarted  by  the 
trouble  of  rambling  ftill  upon  afcents  and  defcents ;  for  you 
can't  have  the  accommodation  of  Hackny-Coaches,  that  are 
common  elfewhere.  Here  we  meet  with  Stately  and  Magnifi- 
cent Churches ;  the  moft  considerable  of  which  are  La  Ceil, 
Notre  Dame  de  Loreto,  San  Ficente,  San  Roch,  San  Pablo,  and 
Santo  Domingo.  The  Benedittin  Monaftery  of  St.  Bento  is  the 
fineft  and  beft  Indow'd  Monaftery  that  the  Town  affords;  But 
laft  Month  part  of  its  fine  Fabrick  was  Burnt  down  by  an 
unfortunate  Fire  ;  and  upon  that  occafion  I  faw  more  Silver 
Plate  carried  out  of  it  than  fix  great  Mules  could  carry. 

If  the  King's  Palace  were  finifiVd,  'twould  be  one  of  the 
nobleft  Edifices  in  Europe ;  but  the  compleating  of  it  would 
coft  at  leaft  two  Millions  of  Crowns.  Strangers  lodge  for  the 
moft  part  in  the  Houfes  that  Front  the  Taio.  I  know  feveral 
French  Merchants,  fome  Popifh  and  fome  Proteftants,  who  are 
very  confiderable  Traders  in  this  Country.  The  Popifh  French 
Merchants  are  protected  by  France,  and  the  Proteftants  take 
Shelter  under  the  Englijh  and  Dutch.  Here  we  [196]  reckon 
almoft  Fifty  Englijh  Families,  and  as  many  Dutch,  befides  fome 
other  Forreigners,  who  do  all  of  'em  get  Eftates  in  a  very 
little  time,  by  the  great  vent  of  the  Commodities  of  the 
Country.  The  Englijh  Baetas,  or  the  Colchejler  light  Stuffs 
fell  admirably  well  in  this  Place ;  and  there's  great  Profit 
got  upon  the  French  Linnen,  the  Tours  and  Lions  Silk  Stuffs, 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  631 

French  Ribbands,  Lace  and  Iron  Ware;  which  are  ballanc'd 
by  Sugar,  Tobacco,  Indigo,  Cacao  Nuts,  &c. 

The  Alfandigaa  or  Duty  of  Sugar  and  Tobacco  is  one  of 
the  beft  Branches  of  the  Royal  Revenue,  as  well  as  that  on 
Silk,  Linnen  and  Woollen  Cloath,  which  the  Merchants  are 
oblig'd  to  get  Stamp'd  upon  the  payment  of  a  certain  Duty 
proportionable  to  the  value  and  quality  of  the  Effects.  Your 
dry'd  Cod  pays  almoft  Thirty  per  Cent  Cuftom ;  fo  that 
there's  fcarce  any  thing  got  by  Importing  of  them,  unlefs  it 
be  when  the  firft  Ships  come  in  from  Newfoundland.  Tobacco, 
whether  in  Snufh  or  in  Rolls,  is  fold  by  Retail  at  the  fame 
price  as  in  France ;  for  Snufh  is  worth  two  Crowns  a  Pound, 
and  the  other  Tobacco  is  fold  for  about  Fifty  Pence.  'Tis 
eafie  to  evade  the  Cuftoms,  if  one  has  a  right  underftanding 
with  the  Guards,  who  are  a  parcel  of  Knaves  that  the  found 
of  a  Piftole  will  make  as  flexible  as  you  can  wifh.  No  Portman- 
teau or  Cloakbag  can  be  carried  into  the  City  without  being 
fearch'd  by  thefe  doughty  Gentlemen.  Galloons,  Fringes, 
Brocado's,  and  Gold  or  Silver  Ribbands  are  Confiscated  as 
Contreband  Goods  ;  for  no  Perfon,  of  what  Station  foever, 
is  allow'd  to  have  Silver  or  Gold  Thread  either  in  his  Cloaths 
or  the  Furniture  of  his  Houfe. 

All  Books,  in  what  Language  foever,  are  immediately  laid 
before  the  Inquifition,  and  burnt  [197]  if  they  do  not  pleafe 
the  Inquifitors.  This  Tribunal,  of  which  a  French  Phyfician 
gives  us  a  Pathetick  Defcription,  from  the  fad  experiences  of 
the  Evils  he  underwent  at  Goa ;  this  Tribunal,  I  fay,  which 


632  Some  New  Voyages 

belches  out  more  Fire  and  Flames  than  Mount  Gibel,  is  fo  hot 
upon  the  Point  that  if  this  Letter  came  before  'em,  both  it 
and  the  Author  would  be  in  equal  danger  of  being  burn'd ; 
and  'tis  upon  this  Confideration  that  I  take  care  to  hold  my 
Peace,  efpecially  fince  the  very  Grandees  of  the  Kingdom  are 
affraid  to  fpeak  of  this  Sanctified  Office.      Some  Days  ago  I 
had   an   Interview  with  a   fenfible  wife  Portugefe,  who  after 
informing  me  of  the  Manners  and  Cuftoms  of  the  People  of 
Angola  and  Brafil,  where  he  had  liv'd  feveral  Years,  took  plea- 
fure  to  hear  me  recount  the  Fafhions  and  Humours  of  the 
Savages  of  Canada  ;  but  when  I  came  to  the  broiling  of  the 
Prifoners  of  War  that  fall  into  the  Hands  of  the  Iroquefe,  he 
cry'd  out  with  a  furious  Accent,  That  the  Iroquefe  of  Portugal 
were  yet  more  cruel  than  thofe  of  America,  in  burning  without 
Mercy  their  Relations  and  Friends,  whereas  the  latter  inflicted 
that  Punifhment  only  upon  the  cruel  Enemies  of  their  Nation. 
In  former  Times  the  Portuguefe  had  fuch  a  Veneration  for 
the    Monks,   that   they  fcrupl'd    to   enter   into   their  Wives 
Chambers,  at  a  time  when  the  good  Fathers  were  exhorting 
them  to  fomething  elfe  than  Repentance;  but  now  a  days  they 
are  not  allow'd  fo  much  Liberty:  And  indeed  I  muft  own, 
that  the   greateft  part  of  'em  live  fuch  lewd   and   irregular 
Lives,  that  their  extravagant  Debauches  have  fhock'd  me  a 
hundred  times.      They  have   Indulgences   from  the   Pope's 
Nuncio  to  follow  all  manner  of  Libertinifm ;  for  that  Papal 
Minifter,  whofe  Power  is  unlimited  as  to  Ecclefiafticks,  gives 
'em  leave,  [198]  nothwithftanding  the  Remonftrances  of  their 
Superiors,  to  wear  a  Hat  in  the  City,  (i.e.  to  go  about  without 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  633 

a  Companion)  to  lie  out  of  the  Convent,  and  even  to  take  a 
Country  Journey  now  and  then.  Perhaps  they  would  be 
wifer,  and  their  number  would  be  fmaller,  if  they  were  not 
oblig'd  (as  well  as  the  Nuns)  to  make  their  Vows  at  14  Years 
of  Age. 

Moft  of  the  Portuguefe  Coaches  are  Chariots  Imported 
from  France.  None  but  the  King  and  Ambaffadors  are  drawn 
by  fix  Horfes  or  Mules  within  the  City  Walls;  out  of  the 
City,  indeed,  your  Perfons  of  Quality  may  have  a  hundred 
if  they  will ;  but  within  the  Walls  they  dare  not  have  more 
than  four.  The  Ladies  and  the  old  Gentlemen  are  carried  in 
Sedans  or  Chairs,  fo  that  Chariots  are  only  made  ufe  of  by 
the  younger  Noblemen ;  none  are  allow'd  to  make  ufe  of 
Coaches  and  Sedans  but  the  Nobility,  Envoys,  Refidents, 
Confuls,  and  Ecclefiafticks ;  fo  that  the  richer!  Citizens  and 
Merchants  rauft  content  themfelves  with  a  fort  of  Calafh  with 
two  Wheels,  drawn  by  one  Horfe,  and  driven  by  themfelves. 
The  Mules  that  carry  the  Litters  or  Sedans  are  larger,  finer 
and  not  fo  broad  Chefted  as  thofe  of  Auvergne.  A  Brace 
of  'em,  generally  fpeaking,  is  worth  Eight  hundred  Crowns; 
nay  fome  of  'em  will  fetch  Twelve  hundred,  efpecially  if  they 
come  from  the  Country  of  the  famous  Don  Quixot,  which  lies 
at  a  great  diftance  from  Lisbon.  The  Coach  Mules  come 
from  Eftremadura,  and  are  worth  about  a  hundred  Piftoles  a 
Pair.  The  Saddle  and  Carriage  Mules,  and  the  Spanifli 
Horfes,  are  Cent  per  Cent  dearer  than  in  Caftile.  When  'tis 
fair  Weather  the  young  Sparks  ride  up  and  down  the  City  on 
Horfe-back,  on   purpofe   to  fhew  themfelves  to   the  Ladies, 


634  Some  New  Voyages 

who  like  Birds  in  a  Cage  [199]  have  no  other  Privilege  than 

.  that   of   viewing   through   the    *  Chinks  of 

*  Windows   with 

Grates  the  Inter-     Jealou"e  tne  Creatures  whole  Company  they 

vals  of  which  are  wifh  for  in  their  Prifons.  The  Monks  who 
no  larger  than  are  provided  for  by  Indowments  make  no 
one's  little  Finger.     yifits    Qn  ¥qq^   f()r   thejr   Convent   keeps    a 

certain  number  of  Saddle  Mules,  which  they  make  ufe  of  by 
turns  :  And  'tis  wonderful  Comical  to  fee  the  good  Fathers 
patrol  and  wheel  about  the  Streets  with  great  long  crown'd 
Hats  like  Sugar-loafs,  and  Spectacles  that  cover  three  fourths 
of  their  Face. 

Tho'  Lisbon  is  a  very  large  City,  and  a  place  of  great 
Trade,  yet  there's  but  two  good  French  Inns  or  Ordinaries 
in  the  whole  Town,  where  one  may  eat  tolerably  well  for 
five  and  thirty  Sous  a  Meal.  Queftionlefs  the  number  of  good 
Ordinaries  would  be  enlarg'd  in  courfe,  if  the  Portuguese  took 
pleafure  in  Eating  and  Drinking ;  for  then  they  would  not 
contemn  thofe  who  are  follicitous  to  find  out  good  Cheer. 
They  are  not  contented  with  difdaining  the  Trade  of  an 
Innkeeper  ;  but  the  very  name  of  a  Publick  Houfe  is  fo  odious 
to  them,  that  they  fcorn  to  vifit  any  Gentleman  that  Lodges 
in  thofe  charming  Quarters.  For  this  reafon,  Sir,  you  would 
do  well  to  advife  any  Friend  of  yours,  that  has  the  Curiofity 
to  Travel  into  Portugal,  and  means  to  make  any  ftay  in  this 
Town,  to  go  into  a  Penfion  at  fome  French  Merchants  Houfe. 
One  may  feed  very  well  in  this  Town,  only  'tis  fomewhat  dear. 
The  Alemteio  Poultry,  the  St.  Ubal  Hares  and  Partridges,  and 
the  Algarva  Butchers  Meat  eat  admirably  well.     The  Lamego 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  635 

Bacon  and  Hams  are  nicer  Food  than  thofe  of  Mayence  and 

Bayonne;  and  yet  that  fort  of  Meat  fits  fo  uneafie  upon  the 

Stomach  of  a  Portuguefe,  that,  [200]  if  'twere  not  for  the  Con- 

fumption  in  the  Monks  and  Inquifitors  Houfe,  there  would 

fcarce  be  any  Hogs  in  all  Portugal.     The  Portuguefe  Wines  are 

ftrong  and  have  a  good  Body,  efpecially  the  Red  Wines  which 

run  very  near  to  a  Black  Colour.     The  Aleguete  and  Barra  a 

Barra  Wines  are  the  fineft  and  thofe  of  the  thineft  Body. 

The  King  never  tafts  Wine,  and  the  Perfons  of  Quality 

drink  of  it  but  very  feldom,  no  more  than  the  Women.     To 

fathom  the  reafon  of  this  Abftinence  we  muft  confider  that 

Venus  has  fuch  an  Intereft  in  Portugal,  that  the  Face  of  her 

Charms  hath  always  kept  Bacchus  from  any  Footing  in  this 

Country.    Here  that  Goddefs  caufes  fo  much  Idolatry,  that  fhe 

feems  to  difpute  with  the  true  God  for  a  right  to  the  Worfhip 

and  Adoration  of  the  Portuguefe,  and  that  in  the  moft  Sacred 

Places ;  for  the  Churches  and  Proceflions  make  the  common 

Randezvous  where  the  Amorous  Alignments    *  j  rort  0f  Braz_ 

are  made.     'Tis  there  that  the  *  Bandarro's,    gadocio  Bully's,  of 

the  Ladies  of  Pleafure  and  the  Women  of    Don    Quixot's 

Intrigue,  take  their  Pofts  ;  for  they  never  fail     Temp'r>  whJ  have 

no   other    Employ- 

to  affift  at  the  Feftivals  that  are  Celebrated  at  ment  than  that  of 
leaft  three  or  four  times  a  Week,  fometimes  hunting  after  Ad- 
in  one  Church  and  fometimes  in  another,  ventures. 
The  fwaggering  Adventurers  have  a  wonderful  Talent  of  dif- 
covering  their  Amorous  Defires  with  one  glance  of  the  Eye  to 
the  Ladies  who  return  'em  an  Anfwer  by  the  fame  Signal ;  and 
this  they  call  Corref ponding.     This  done,  they  have  nothing  to 


636  Some  New  Voyages 

do  but  to  find  out  their  Houfes,  by  following  'em  Foot  for 

Foot  from  the  Church  Door  to  their  refpeclive  Apartments. 

The  conclufion  of  the  Intrigue  lies  in  marching  ftraight  on  to 

the  corner  of  the  Street  without  looking  about  [201]  for  fear 

the  Husband  or  Rivals  mould  fmell  a  Rat.     At  the  end  of 

the  Street  they  have  fo  much  occafion  for  a  large  ftock  of 

Patience  that  they  muft  ftand  there  two  or  three  hours  till  a 

Servant  Maid  comes,  whom  they  muft  follow  till  fhe  finds 

.  .         *  n*  „■        a  handfome   opportunity  of  delivering    her 

T 1.  e.  A  Meffage  rr  J  ° 

or  a  watch  Word    t Recado  fafely.     The  Adventurers  muft  trull 

in  order  to  an  In-  thefe  goodly  Confidents,  and  fometimes  run 
terview.  faQ  rifqUe  0f  their  Lives  upon  their  Word 

and  Directions ;  for  they  are  as  cunning  as  they  are  true  to 
their  Miftrefles,  from  whom  they  receive  Prefents  as  well  as 
from  the  Suitors,  and  fometimes  from  the  Husbands. 

In  former  times  the  Portuguefe  Women  cover'd  their  Faces 

with  their  ||  Mania's,  and  expos'd  nothing  to 
||  Veils  of  Taffitas  ^  ^  ^  „  as  ^  $  .^  Women  do 
which  cover  d  both  J  * 

the  Face  and  the    to  this  Day;  but  as  foon  as  they  perceiv  d 

Body,  and  at  the  that  the  Sea  Towns  were  replenifti'd  with  as 
fame  time  cloak'd  fajr  Children  as  any  are  in  France  or  En- 
their  Intrigues.         ^^  ^  poQr  Mmtf$  were  difcarded,  and 

forbid  to  approach  the  Face  of  a  Lady.  The  Portuguefe  have 
fuch  an  Antipathy  and  Horror  for  Ableon's  Arms,  that  they 
had  rather  cut  their  own  Fingers  than  take  Tobacco  out  of  an 
Horn-Box;  tho'  after  all  the  Horn  Commodity  begins  to 
take  here,  notwithftanding  the  repeated  Difcouragements  of 
Poyfon  and  the  Sword.     Almoft  every  Month  brings  us  frefh 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  637 

Inftances  of  fome  Tragical  Adventure  of  that  Nature,  efpe- 
cially  when  the  Angola  or  Brafil  Fleets  are  juft  come  in ;  for 
the  greateft  part  of  the  Seamen  that  go  upon  thefe  Voyages 
are  fo  unfortunate,  that  when  they  return  home  they  find  their 
Wives  lock'd  up  in  [202]  Monafteries  inftead  of  their  own 
Houfes.  The  reafon  of  their  voluntary  Confinement  is  this ; 
that  they  choofe  thus  to  expiate  and  atone  for  the  Sins  they 
committed  in  their  Husbands  abfence,  rather  than  be  ftabb'd 
at  their  return.  Upon  this  fcore  we  ought  not  to  Cenfure 
thofe  who  reprefented  the  Ocean  with  a  Bull's  Horns,  for  in 
good  earneft  almoft  all  that  expofe  themfelves  to  the  brunts  of 
the  Sea  make  much  fuch  another  Figure.  In  fine,  Gallantry 
in  the  way  of  Amours  is  too  ticklifh  a  Trade  in  this  Place,  for 
it  runs  a  Man  in  danger  of  his  Life.  Here  we  find  plenty  of 
Whores,  whofe  Company  ought  by  all  means  to  be  avoided ; 
for  befides  the  danger  of  ruining  one's  Health,  a  Man  runs 
the  rifque  of  being  knock'd  on  the  Head  if  he  frequents 
their  Company.  The  handfomeft  Whores  are  commonly 
Amezada'd  or  hir'd  by  the  Month  by  fome  kind  Keepers,  that 
have  a  watchful  Eye  over  'em ;  but  notwithstanding  all  the 
Keepers  Precaution,  they  enjoy  the  Diverfion  of  fome  wife 
Companions  at  the  expence  of  fuch  Fools.  The  Fools  I  now 
fpeak  of  lye  under  an  indifpenfible  Necefiity  of  keeping  up 
and  feeding  with  Prefents  the  pretended  Love  and  Fidelity  of 
the  faid  Lais's,  the  Enjoyment  of  whom  is  unconceivably 
Chargeable.  The  Nuns  receive  frequent  Vifits  from  their 
Devoto's,  who  have  a  warmer  Paflion  for  them  than  for  the 
Women  of  this  World,  as  it   appears  from  the  Jealoufies, 


638  Some  New  Voyages 

Quarrels,  and  a  Thoufand  other  Diforders  that  arife  among 
the  Rivals  upon  the  fcore  of  Intrigue.  Formerly  the  Parlours 
of  the  Monafteries  were  guarded  only  with  a  fingle  Grate,  but 
fince  my  Lord  Grafton  and  fome  of  the  Captains  of  his 
Squadron  had  the  Curiofity  to  touch  the  Hands,  &c.  of  the 
Nuns  of  Odiveta  ;  the  King  ordered  all  the  Convents  in  the 
Kingdom  to  [203]  have  double  Grates  upon  their  Parlours. 
At  the  fame  time  he  almoft  ftiffled  the  Pretention  of  the 
Devoto's,  by  prohibiting  any  one  to  approach  to  a  Convent 
without  a  lawful  Occafion,  tho'  to  frame  an  occafion  is  eafie  to 
one  that  has  the  folly  to  be  in  Love  with  thefe  poor  Girls. 

The  Portuguese  are  a  People  of  a  quick  Apprehenfion  ; 
they  think  freely,  and  their  Expreffions  come  up  to  the 
juftnefs  of  their  Thoughts :  They  have  able  Phyficians  and 
learned  Cafuifts  among  'em.  The  Celebrated  Camoens  was 
without  difpute  one  of  the  moft  Illuftrious  Citizens  of  Par- 
najfus.  The  teeming  variety  of  his  excellent  Thoughts,  his 
choice  of  Words,  and  the  politenefs  and  eafie  freedom  of  his 
Stile,  charm'd  all  who  were  fufficiently  acquainted  with  the 
Portuguefe  Language.1  'Tis  true  he  had  the  Misfortune  of 
being  rally'd  upon  by  Moreri,  and  by  fome  Spanifh  Authors ; 
who,  when  they  could  not  avoid  owning,  that  'tis  impoffible 
to  furpafs  the  Genius  of  this  unfortunate  Poet,  blacken'd  his 
Character  with  the  imputation  of  Infidelity  and  Profanity. 
A  Catalan  Monk  falls   foul  upon   a   hundred   Places  of  his 


1  Lahontan  here  shows  his  familiarity  with  Portuguese  literature,  and  its  greatest 
poet,  Luiz  de  Camoens,  who  died  in  1579.  His  genius  went  largely  unrecognized 
during  his  lifetime,  and,  as  our  author  indicates,  he  was  subjected  to  petty  perse- 
cutions. —  Ed. 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  639 

Laziadas  Endechas  EJlrivillas,  &c.  and  brands  him  for  an 
Impious  Rattle-brain'd  Fellow.  To  quote  two  Places  that  he 
Cenfures ;  the  firft  is  the  Cadence  of  a  Sonnet  entituled  Soneto 
Nao  Impreffo ;  where  after  fome  Reflections  the  Poet  fays, 
Mais  0  Melhor  de  tudo  e  crer  en  Chrifto ;  i.  e.  After  all,  the 
fureft  way  is  to  believe  in  Chrift.  The  Second  is  the  Conclufion 
of  a  Gloza,  viz.  Si  Deus  fe  Bufca  no  Mnndo  neffes  olios  fe  achara. 
That  is  to  fay,  in  fpeaking  to  a  Lady,  //  we  look  for  God  in  this 
World  we'll  find  him  in  your  Eyes. 

The  Portuguefe  Pulpit-men  cry  up  their  Saints  almoft  above 
God  himfelf ;  and  to  exaggerate  their  Sufferings  lodge  'em  in 
Stables  rather  than  [204]  in  Paradife.  They  conclude  their 
Sermons  with  fuch  Pathetick  Cries  and  Exclamations,  that  the 
Women  figh  and  cry  as  if  they  were  in  defpair.  In  this  Coun- 
try the  Title  of  a  Heretick  is  accounted  highly  infamous;  and 
indeed  it  bears  a  very  odious  Signification.  The  Priefts  and 
Friars  hate  Calvin  for  Curtailing  the  bufinefs  of  Confeflion, 
as  much  as  the  Nuns  efteem  Luther  for  his  Monaftical  Mar- 
riage. In  the  City  they  make  Proceflions  from  one  end  of  the 
Town  to  the  other,  every  Friday  in  Lent.  I  have  feen  above  a 
hundred  difcipline  themfelves  in  the  Streets,  in  an  odd  man- 
ner. They  were  clad  in  White,  with  their  Face  cover'd  and 
their  Back  naked  ;  which  they  lafh  fo  handfomely,  that  the 
Blood  fpurts  in  the  Face  of  the  Women  who  are  fet  upon 
the  fides  of  the  Streets,  on  purpofe  to  ridicule  and  vilify  the 
leaft  Bloody.  Thefe  were  follow'd  by  others  in  Masks,  who 
carried  Croffes,  Chains,  and  bundles  of  Swords  of  an  incred- 
ible weight. 


640  Some  New  Voyages 

The  Foreigners  of  this  place  are  almoft  as  Jealous  as  the 
Portuguefe;  infomuch  that  their  Wives  are  afraid  to  fhew  them- 
felves  to  their  Husband's  beft  Friends.  They  affect  the  Portu- 
guefe Severity  with  fo  much  exactnefs,  that  thefe  poor  Captives 
dare  not  lift  up  their  Eyes  in  the  Prefence  of  a  Man.  But 
notwithftanding  all  their  precaution,  they  fometimes  meet  with 
the  Mifchief  that  they  take  fuch  care  to  avoid.  The  City  is 
Peopled  with  perfons  of  all  Colours,  fome  Black,  fome  Mulat- 
to's, fome  Swarthy,  and  fome  of  an  Olive  Complexion:  But 
the  Greateft  part  are  Trigenbo's,  i.  e.  of  the  Colour  of  Corn. 
The  medley  of  fo  many  different  hues,  do's  fo  mingle  the 
Blood  of  the  Nation,  that  the  true  Whites  make  but  a  very 
fcanty  number ;  and  'tis  for  this  reafon,  that  if  one  were  to  fay 
in  Portuguefe,  I  am  a  Man  {or  [205]  a  Woman)  of  Honour; 
the  nobleft  expreffion  he  can  find,  is,  En  fou  Branco,  or  Branca, 
i.  e.  /  am  a  White. 

You  may  walk  up  and  down  Lisbon  night  and  day  without 
fearing  Pickpockets.  Till  three  or  four  a  Clock  in  the  Morn- 
ing, you  have  Muficians  that  play  in  the  Streets  on  Guitars, 
and  joyn  to  the  Sweetnefs  of  that  Inftrument,  the  moft  moan- 
ful  Songs  that  can  be  imagin'd.  The  way  of  Dancing  among 
the  ordinary  fort  of  People  is  very  indecent,  by  reafon  of  the 
impertinent  Motions  of  their  Head  and  Belly.  The  Inftru- 
mental  Mufick  of  the  Portuguefe  is  difagreeable  at  firft  to  the 
Ears  of  a  Foreigner;  but  at  the  bottom  it  has  fomewhat  in  it 
that's  fweet,  and  pleafes,  when  one  is  accuftom'd  to  it.  Their 
Vocal  Mufick  is  fo  coarfe,  and  its  difcordant  Notes  are  fo 
unhappily  link'd  together ;  that  the  chattering  of  a  Crow  is 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  641 

more  Melodious.  Their  Church  Mufical  Compofures  are  all 
in  the  Caftilian  Language,  as  well  as  their  Paftorals  and  moft 
of  their  Songs.  They  endeavour  to  imitate  the  Spanijh  Cuf- 
toms  as  much  as  poffible ;  nay,  they  are  fo  nice  in  obferving 
the  Ceremonies  of  the  Spani/Ii  Court,  that  the  Portugiiefe 
Minifters  would  be  very  much  difoblig'd  if  the  leaft  For- 
mality were  lop'd  off.  The  King  and  the  Grandees  wear 
much  fuch  another  Habit  as  our  Financiers  or  Receivers  of 
the  Royal  Revenue.  They  have  a  clofe  Coat  with  a  Cloak  of 
the  fame  colour ;  a  great  Band  of  Venice  Point,  with  a  long 
Perriwig,  a  Sword,  and  a  Dagger.  They  give  the  Title  of 
Excellentia  to  Ambaffadours,  and  that  of  Senhoria  to  Envoys 
and  Refidents. 

The  Port  of  Lisbon  is  large,  fafe  and  convenient ;  tho'  the 
Entry  is  very  difficult.  The  Ships  Ride  at  Anchor  between 
the  City  and  the  Caftle  of  Almada,  at  eighteen  Fathom  Water 
on  a  good  [206]  ftrong  Ground.  The  Lisbon  River  is  call'd 
by  the  Portugiiefe,  0  Rey  dos  Rios,  i.  e.  The  King  of  Rivers. 
'Tis  almoft  a  League  broad  where  the  Ships  Ride;  at  which 
place  the  Tide  rifes  twelve  foot  perpendicular,  and  runs  above 
ten  Leagues  farther  up  towards  its  fource.  All  Captains  of 
Ships,  whether  Men  of  War  or  Merchant  Men,  Foreigners 
or  Natives,  are  exprefsly  prohibited  to  Salute  the  City  with  a 
Difcharge  of  Cannon,  or  fire  a  Ship  Gun  before  it,  upon  any 
pretence  whatfoever.  The  Confuls  of  France,  England  and 
Holland,  have  five  or  fix  thoufand  Livres  a  piece  allow'd  'em 
yearly ;  befides  which,  they  make  a  fhift  to  get  as  much  more 
by  Trading. 

41 


642  Some  New  Voyages 

This,  Sir,  is  all  the  account  I  can  give  you  at  prefent  of 
this  charming  Country ;  which  to  my  mind  would  be  a  Para- 
dife  upon  Earth,  if  'twere  Inhabited  by  Peafants  that  had  lefs 
of  the  Gentleman  in  their  Conduct.  The  Climate  is  admir- 
ably fweet  and  agreeable ;  the  Air  is  clear  and  ferene,  the 
Water  of  the  Country  is  wonderful  good,  and  the  Winter  is 
fo  mild  that  I  have  felt  no  cold  as  yet.  In  this  Country,  the 
People  may  live  for  an  Age  without  any  inconveniency  from 
advancing  Years.  The  old  Perfons  are  not  loaded  with  the 
Infirmities  that  plague  thofe  of  other  Countries ;  their  Appe- 
tite do's  not  fail  'em,  and  their  Blood  is  not  fo  difpirited,  but 
that  their  Wives  can  vouch  for  their  perfect  health.  Ardent 
Fevers  make  a  terrible  Havock  in  Portugal,  and  the  Venereal 
Diforders  are  fo  civil,  that  no  body  troubles  his  head  for  a 
cure.  The  Pox,  which  is  very  frequent  in  the  Country,  gives 
fo  little  uneafynefs,  that  the  very  Phyficians  who  have  it,  are 
loth  to  carry  it  off,  for  fear  of  going  to  the  charge  of  repeated 
Cures.  The  Juftices  and  Peace-Officers  are  fawcy  and  unfuf- 
ferably  [207]  arrogant,  as  being  authoris'd  by  a  King  that 
obferves  the  Laws  with  the  utmoft  Severity ;  for  this  incour- 
ages  'em  to  pick  quarrels  with  the  People,  from  whom  they 
frequently  receive  very  cruel  Reprimands.  Some  time  ago, 
the  Count  de  Prado  Son  in  Law  to  the  Marfhal  de  Villeroy,  took 

the  pains  to  fend  into  the  other  World 
*  i.  e.  An  Intendant  an  infolent  *  Qorrigidor,  that  would  will- 
and  Civil  judge.  .  _ 

ingly  have  dilpenled  with  the  Voyage. 

While  that  Gentleman  was  Riding  in  Coach  with  his  Coufin, 
at  the  corner  of  a  Street  he  met   the  Corrigidor,  who  was 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  643 

Mounted  like  a  St.  George,  and  to  his  Misfortune  fo  proud  of 
his  Office,  that  he  did  not  daign  to  give  the  two  Gentlemen 
a  Salute.  I've  acquainted  you  already  that  the  Portuguefe 
Gentlemen  are  the  vaineft  Men  in  the  World ;  and  upon  that 
fcore,  you  will  not  think  it  ftrange  that  thefe  two  Gentlemen 
alighted  from  the  Coach,  and  made  the  Corrigidor  fpring  from 
his  Horfe  and  Jump  into  the  other  World.  A  French  Man 
will  be  ready  to  fay  that  the  Intendant's  Indifcretion  did  not 
deferve  fuch  rude  ufage ;  but  the  Portuguefe  Perfons  of  Quality 
that  cover  their  Heads  in  the  prefence  of  their  King,  will  be 
of  another  mind.  However,  the  two  Chavalier's  took  Shelter 
in  the  Houfe  of  the  Abbot  d'Eftrees,  who  fent  'em  to  France  in 
a  Breft  Frigot. 

It  now  remains  to  give  you  a  Lift  of  the  King  of  Portugal's 
Standing  Forces.  He  has  eighteen  thoufand  Foot,  eight 
thoufand  Horfe,  and  twenty  two  Men  of  War ;  namely, 

4  Ships  from  60  to  70  Guns. 

6  Ships  from  50  to  60  Guns. 

6  Ships  from  40  to  50  Guns. 

6  Frigats  from  30  to  40  Guns. 
[208]  You  muft  know  that  the  King's  Ships  are  light 
Timber'd,  well  Built  and  handfomely  Model'd  ;  their  Caulk- 
ing, Iron  Work  and  Roundings  is  all  very  neat.  Their 
Arfenals  and  Naval  Stores  are  in  great  diforder,  and  good 
Sailors  are  as  fcarce  in  Portugal  as  good  Sea  Officers,  for  the 
Government  has  neglected  the  Forming  of  Marine  Nurferies 
and  Navigation  Schools,  and  a  thoufand  other  neceffary 
things ;  the  difcuffion  of  which  would  lead  me  too  far  out  of 


644  Some  New  Voyages 

my  way.  The  Portnguefe  are  charg'd  with  being  fomewhat 
dull  and  flow  in  Working  their  Ships,  and  lefs  brave  by  Sea 
than  by  Land. 

The  Captains  of  the  King's  Ships  have  commonly  twenty 
two  Patacas  a  Month;  and  a  free  Table  while  they  are  at  Sea ; 
befides  fome  Perquefites. 

A  Lieutenant's  Pay  is  fixteen  Patacas  a  Month. 

An  Enfign  of  Marines  has  ten  Patacas  a  Month. 

An  Able  Sailor  has  four  Patacas  a  Month. 

A  Captain  of  a  Company  of  Foot  has  about  five  and 
twenty  Patacas  a  Month,  in  Pay  and  Perquifites  both  in  Peace 
and  War. 

The  Jlufieres,  who  are  a  fort  of  Lieutenants,  have  eight 
Patacas. 

A  Common  Soldier's  Pay  is  about  two  pence  half-penny  a 
day  of  our  Mony. 

A  Captain  of  Horfe  has  in  Pay  and  Perquifites,  in  time  of 
Peace,  about  a  hundred  Pataca's  a  Month. 

A  Lieutenant  of  Horfe  has  near  thirty  Pataca's  a  Month. 

A  Quartermafter  fifteen  Pataca's  a  Month. 

A  Trooper  four  Sous  a  day,  and  his  Forrage. 

As  for  the  General  Land  and  Sea  Officers,  'tis  hard  to  tell 
exactly  what  their  Incomes  amount  to  :  For  the  King  grants 
Penfions  to  fome,  and  Commandries  to  others,  as  he  fees  occa- 
fion.  The  [209]  Collonels,  Lieutenant-Collonels  and  Majors 
of  Foot,  as  well  as  the  Maitres  de  Camp  and  the  Commif- 
iarys,  have  no  fix'd  Allowance  :  For  fome  have  more  and  fome 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  645 

lefs,  in  proportion  to  the  advantage  of  the  Place  where  their 
Troops  are  Quarter'd,  and  the  number  of  their  Men. 

The  Portuguefe  Troops  are  ill  Difciplin'd.  Neither  Horfe 
nor  Foot  are  Cloath'd  after  the  fame  manner;  for  fome  have 
a  Brown  Livery,  fome  Red,  fome  Black,  fome  Blew,  fome 
Green,  &c.  Their  Arms  are  very  good  ;  and  the  Officers  do 
not  mind  their  brightnefs,  provided  they  are  in  a  good  Con- 
dition. One  would  fcarce  believe  that  thefe  are  the  Troops 
that  did  fuch  mighty  Feats  againft  the  Spaniards  in  the  laft 
Wars.  In  all  appearance  they  were  better  Difciplin'd  in  thofe 
days  than  they  are  now,  and  were  not  fo  much  taken  up  with 
their  Guitars. 

To  mew  you  the  Species  and  Value  of  the  Mony  that's 
Current  in  this  Country : 

A  Spanijh  Piaftre  or  piece  of  Eight,  which  the  Portuguefe 
call  a  Pataca,  is  worth  a  French  Crown  ;  and  contains  7$oReys. 

The  half  pieces  and  quarter  pieces  are  of  a  proportionable 
Value. 

A  Rey  is  a  Denier^  as  I  intimated  above. 

The  loweft  Silver  Coin  they  have  is  a  Vintaine  or  twenty 
penny  piece,  being  20  Reys. 

A  Teftoon  is  worth  5  Vintaines. 

A  Detni-Teftoon  goes  in  a  half  proportion. 

An  old  Cruzada  is  near  4  Teftoons. 

The  Mada  d'  ouro,  a  Gold  Coin,  is  worth  6  Pataca's  and  3 
Teftoons. 

The  half  and  quarter  Mada's  have  a  proportionable  Value. 


646  Some  New  Voyages 

A  Lowis  d'or,  whether  Old  or  New,  goes  for  four  Piaftres 
wanting  two  Teftoons. 

[210]  The  half  and  quarter  Piftoles  go  upon  the  fame  pro- 
portion. 

A  Spanifh  Piftole,  full  Weight,  goes  at  the  fame  rate  for  4 
Piaftres,  wanting  two  Teftoons;  fo  that  there's  Mony  got  by 
fending  'em  to  Spain,  where  they're  worth  4  Piaftres  neat. 

No  Species  of  Mony  bears  the  King  of  Portugal's  Effigies; 
and  there's  no  diftinclion  made  in  Portugal,  between  the  Seville 
Piaftres  and  thofe  of  Mexico,  or  of  Peru,  as  they  do  elfewhere. 

No  French  Coin  paffes  in  this  Country,  excepting  Crowns, 
half  Crowns  and  quarter  Crowns. 

The  Portuguefe  128  pound  is  equal  to  the  Paris  100  Weight. 
Their  Calido  is  a  Meafure  that  exceeds  the  Paris  half  Ell  by 
three  inches  and  a  line ;  fo  that  its  juft  extent  is  two  French 
foot,  one  inch  and  one  line.  Their  Bara  is  another  Meafure, 
fix  of  which  makes  ten  Calido's.  The  Portuguefe  League  is 
4200  Geometrical  Paces,  allowing  five  Foot  to  every  Pace. 

As  for  the  Intereft  of  the  Portuguefe  Court,  I  wave  it  on 
purpofe  becaufe  I  have  no  mind  to  enter  into  Politicks. 
Befides,  I  have  already  acquainted  you  that  I  pretend  to  Write 
nothing  elfe  but  fuch  trifles  as  have  not  been  yet  took  notice 
of  in  Print.  If  it  were  not  that  I  had  laid  my  felf  under  that 
Reftriction,  I  could  fend  you  a  circumftantial  account  of  their 
different  Tribunals  or  Courts  of  Juftice,  and  fome  Scraps  of 
their  Laws  :  I  could  give  you  to  underftand  that  the  Parlia- 
ment and  Arch-Bifhoprick  of  Lisbon,  make  one  of  the  greateft 
Ornaments  of  this  Metropolis ;  that  the  Ecclefiaftical  Benefices 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  647 

are  extream  large  ;  that  there  are  no  Commendatory  Abbeys 
in  the  Country,  that  the  Friars  are  neither  fo  well  indow'd  nor 
fo  well  entertain'd  as  one  might  expect.  I  could  inform  you 
that  the  King's  Royal  Order  is  call'd  Uhablto  de  Crifto,  If 
[211]  Madam  d?  Annoy  had  not  taught  you  fo  much  in  De- 
ferring the  admirable  Inftitution  of  that  Order ;  and  there- 
fore mall  content  my  felf  in  adding  that  the  number  of  the 
Knights  Companions  of  this  Order  runs  far  beyond  that  of 
its  Commandries,  which  are  worth  very  little.  Here  I  muft 
make  a  halt  and  take  leave  of  this  Royal  City,  which  'tis 
poffible  I  may  fee  once  more  hereafter.  I  fet  out  immediately 
for  the  Northern  Kingdoms  of  Europe;  waiting  patiently  till 
it  pleafes  God  that  Monfieur  Ponchartrain  fhould  either  remove 
to  Paradife,  or  do  Juftice  to  him  who  fhall  always  be  yours 
more  than  his  own. 

Your  Humble,  &c. 


648  Some  New  Voyages 


LETTER  II. 

Dated  at  Travemunde,  1694. 

Containing  an  Account  of  the  Author's  Voyage  from  Lisbon 
to  Garnfey ;  his  Adventure  with  an  Englijh  Man  of  War 
and  a  Privateer :  A  Defcription  of  Rotterdam  and  Amfter- 
dam ;  the  Author's  Voyage  to  Hamburg;  the  Dimenfions 
of  a  Flemijh  Sloop  ;  a  Defcription  of  the  City  of  Hamburg  ; 
the  Author's  Journy  from  thence  to  Lubeck ;  and  a  De- 
fcription of  that  City. 

I  SET  out  from  Lisbon  on  the  \tb  of  April,  having  bargain'd 
with  a  Mafter  of  a  Ship  to  Land  me  at  Amfterdam  for  thirty 
Piaftres.  At  the  [212]  fame  time,  I  had  the  precaution  of 
taking  a  Pafs  from  the  Dutch  Refident,  for  fear  of  being 
ftop'd  in  that  Country.  I  went  in  a  Boat  to  a  place  call'd 
Belin,  which  lies  about  two  Leagues  below  Lisbon.  At  this 
little  Town  all  the  Merchant  Ships  that  go  and  come,  are 
oblig'd  to  fhew  their  Cockets,  Invoice,  and  Bills  of  Lading, 
and  to  pay  the  Duty  for  their  Cargo.  The  6th  we  got  out  of 
the  Taio,  and  follow'd  the  Rake  of  a  Fleet  Bound  for  the 
Baltick  Sea,  and  Convoy'd  by  a  Swedijh  Man  of  War  of  60  Guns, 
Commanded  by  a  Lubecker  whofe  Name  was  Crenger ;  and 
whom  the  King  of  Sweden  had  prefer'd  to  a  Noble  Dignity, 
notwithstanding    that    Originally   he    had    been   a   Common 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  649 

Sailor.  We  crofs'd  the  Barr  by  the  way  of  the  Great  Channel 
or  Pafs,  between  Fort  Bougio,  and  the  Cachopas  ;  the  laft  being 
a  great  Bank  of  Sand  and  Rocks,  extending  to  three  quarters 
of  a  League  in  length,  and  half  a  League  in  breadth,  which 
Ships  are  apt  to  fall  foul  of  in  a  Calm,  by  reafon  of  the  Tides 
that  bear  that  way.  You  muft  know  that  if  we  had  had  Pilots 
that  knew  the  Coaft,  we  would  have  pafs'd  between  that  Bank 
and  the  Fort  of  St.  Julian,  which  lies  to  the  North  or  the 
Lisbon  fide,  oppofite  to  Bougio ;  but  we  had  no  occafion  to 
employ  'em,  fince  our  Portuguefe  Captain  took  the  opportunity 
of  following  the  run  of  the  Baltick  Fleet.  As  foon  as  we  came 
into  the  Main,  and  fell  into  the  middle  of  that  North  Country 
Fleet,  the  Brutifh  Commodore  made  down  upon  us  with  all 
Sails  aloft,  and  fir'd  a  Cannon  with  Ball  in  Head  of  our  Ship ; 
after  which  he  fent  out  his  Lieutenant  to  acquaint  our  poor 
Mafter,  that  it  behov'd  him  to  pay  two  Piftoles  immediately  for 
the  Shot,  and  to  Sheer  off  from  his  Fleet,  unlefs  he  had  a  mind 
to  pay  a  hundred  Piaftres  for  his  Convoy,  which  the  Mafter  of 
our  Veflel  refus'd  very  Gracefully. 

[213]  But  to  drop  this  Subject ;  I  muft  acquaint  you  that 
the  Barr  of  Lisbon  is  inacceffible  while  the  Wind  blows  hard 
from  the  Weft  and  South- Weft ;  which  commonly  happens  in 
Winter.  Add  to  this,  that  for  eight  Months  of  the  Year  the 
North  and  North-Eaft  Winds  prevail,  and  that  moderately : 
By  which  means  it  came  about,  that  our  Paffage  from  the 
Mouth  of  the  Taio  to  Cape  Finifterre  was  longer  than  an 
ordinary  Voyage  from  the  Ifle  of  Newfound-Land  to  France. 
I  never  faw  fuch  conftant  Winds  as  thefe ;  however  we  got 


650  Some  New  Voyages 

clear  of  'em,  by  Traverfing  and  Sweeping  along  the  Coaft, 
which  our  Portuguefe  Captain  durft  not  leave  for  fear  of  the 
Sally-Rovers,  whom  they  dread  more  than  Hell  it  felf.  At 
laft,  after  18  or  20  days  Sailing,  we  Weather'd  Cape  Finifterre ; 
and  then  the  Wind  Veering  to  the  South-Weft,  we  made  fuch 
way  that  in  ten  or  twelve  days  we  came  in  fight  of  the  Ifle  of 
Guernfey.  I  muft  fay,  that  if  it  had  not  been  for  a  French  Pilot 
that  conn'd  the  Ship,  we  had  frequently  fallen  Foul  on  the 
Coaft  of  the  Britijh  Channel :  For  you  muft  know,  the  Portu- 
guefe have  but  little  acquaintance  with  the  Northern  Seas,  and 
the  Lands  that  jut  out  into  'em ;  and  for  that  reafon  are 
oblig'd  to  make  ufe  of  Foreign  Pilots  when  they  are  Bound 
for  England  or  Holland.  The  fame  day  that  we  defcry'd 
Guernfey,  two  great  Englifli  Ships  gave  us  Chafe  with  full  Sail, 
and  in  three  or  four  hours  came  up  with  us :  One  of  'em  was 
a  King's  Ship  of  fixty  Guns ;  and  the  other  was  a  Privateer  of 
fourty  Guns,  Commanded  by  one  Cowper,  who  was  naturally 
very  well  calculated  for  a  Pickpocket,  as  you'll  fee  in  the 
Sequel.  As  foon  as  they  came  up  with  us,  we  were  forc'd  to 
Strike  and  put  out  our  Long  Boat,  into  which  I  went  in  order 
to  fhew  the  Captain,  whofe  name  was  Townfend,  the  Pafs  I  had 
receiv'd  from  the  [214]  Dutch  Refident  at  Lisbon.  This 
Captain  treated  me  with  all  poflible  Civility,  in  fo  much  that 
he  affur'd  me  all  my  Baggage  fhould  be  fecur'd  from  the 
Rapine  of  Captain  Cowper,  who  purfuant  to  the  Principles  of 
his  profeffion,  pretended  to  Pillage  me  with  as  little  Scruple 
as  Mercy.  However,  our  Ship  could  not  be  Search'd  till  we 
got  into  Guernfey  Road,  and  for  that  reafon  we  were  carry'd 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  651 

thither  the  fame  day;  and  after  dropping  Anchor  the  two 
Englijh  Captains  went  a  Shoar,  and  fent  two  Searchers  on 
Board  of  us,  to  try  if  they  could  prove  that  the  Wine  and 
Brandy  with  which  our  Ship  was  Fraughted,  was  of  the  growth 
of  France  or  Exported  by  Commiffion  from  French  Merchants; 
which  they  could  not  poflibly  make  out,  notwithstanding  that 
they  fpent  fifteen  days  in  fearching  and  rummaging,  as  I  heard 
afterwards  at  Lubec.     This  troublefome  Accident  oblig'd  me 

in  five  or  fix  days  after,  to  Imbarque  in 

n   ,  7     t?  •  r*^-  1       •  *^  Place  in  Holland, 

a  Dutch    tfngat   of   *  Circzee ;    having 

firft  prefented  Captain  Town/end  with  fome  Casks  of  Allegrete 

Wine,  a   Cheft  of  Oranges,   and   fome      .    .   „  „ 

rvrL      n       >j    s.  +  va-  ju-        '  ^    Portuguefe    City 

Dimes  Carv  d  at  t  Eftremos  ;  and  that  in     that  ftands  almofion  the 

acknowledgment  of  the  kind  Ufage  and     Frontiers  towards  Ex- 
good   Entertainment  that  he  gave  me     tremadura. 
both  a  Shoar,  and  on  Board  of  his  Ship. 

My  Second  Voyage  prov'd  more  favourable  than  the 
former;  for  in  three  days  Sailing  I  arriv'd  at  Circzee;  at 
which  place  I  went  on  Board  of  a  Paffage  Smack,  which  fteer'd 
between  the  Iflands,  and  by  vertue  of  the  Winds  and  Tydes 
wafted  me  to  Rotterdam. 

Rotterdam  is  a  very  large  fine  City,  and  a  place  of  very 
great  Trade.  Here  I  had  the  Pleafure  of  viewing  in  two  days 
time,  the  Maes  College,  the  [215]  Arfenal  for  Naval  Stores, 
and  the  great  Tower,  which  by  the  induftry  of  a  Carpenter 
was  Reinstated  in  its  perpendicular  Pofture,  at  a  time  when  it 
bended  and  fhelv'd  in  fuch  a  monftrous  manner,  as  to  threaten 
the  City  with  the  Load  of  its  Ruines.    I  had  likewife  the  Satis- 


652  Some  New  Voyages 

faction  of  feeing  the  Houfe  of  the  Famous  Erafmus,  as  well  as 
the  Beauty  of  the  Port  or  the  Maes,  the  Mouth  of  which  is 
very  dangerous,  by  reafon  of  fome  Shelves  and  Banks  of  Sand 
that  moot  out  a  pretty  way  into  the  Sea.  The  Trade  of 
Rotterdam  is  very  confiderable,  and  the  Merchants  of  that 
place  enjoy  the  conveniency  of  bringing  their  Ships  up  to 
the  Doors  of  their  Ware-Houfes,  by  the  help  of  the  Canals  or 
Ditches,  that  interfecl  this  great  City.  Two  days  after  my 
Arrival,  I  Imbarqu'd  at  five  a  Clock  in  the  Morning  in  a 
Travelling  Boat  or  Tratt  Scuyt  for  Amfterdam.  This  fort  of 
Boats  is  cover'd  with  Ribs,  being  flat,  long  and  broad ;  and 
has  a  Bench  or  Form  on  each  fide,  that  reaches  from  the 
Prow  to  the  Poop.  In  this  Conveniency,  which  one  Horfe 
will  draw,  we  travel  a  League  an  hour,  for  three  Sous  and  a 
half  per  League.  In  all  the  Principal  Cities  of  Holland  the 
Scuyts  fet  out  every  hour,  whether  full  or  empty  :  But  you  muft 
know  that  you  frequently  fhift  Boats,  and  for  that  end  muft 
walk  on  foot  thro'  feveral  Cities.  In  this  fmall  Voyage  I 
walk'd  thro'  Delft,  Leyden  and  Harlem,  which  appear'd  to  be 
large,  neat  and  fine  Cities.  After  I  had  Travel'd  in  thefe 
Boats  twelve  Leagues  upon  Ditches  lin'd  with  Trees,  Meads, 
Gardens,  and  moft  pleafant  Houfes,  I  arriv'd  at  Amfterdam  in 
the  Evening. 

When  I  came  to  my  Inn,  my  Landlord  order'd  me  a 
Guide,  who  in  feven  or  eight  days  time  fhew'd  me  all  the 
Curiofities  of  this  Flourifhing  City;  but  I  could  have  done  it 
in  three  [216]  or  four  days,  if  the  City  had  afforded  the  Con- 
veniency of  Hackney-Coaches,  fuch  as  they  have  at  Paris  and 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  653 

other  Places.  The  City  is  large,  neat  and  fine ;  moft  of  its 
Canals  or  Graafs  are  deck'd  with  very  pretty  Houfes  :  But  the 
Water  Stagnating  in  thefe  large  Cifterns  fmells  very  ftrong  in 
Hot  Weather.  The  Edifices  are  for  the  moft  part  Uniform, 
and  the  Streets  are  drawn  as  if  'twere  by  a  Line.  The  Guild- 
Hall  or  Stadt-Houfe  ftands  upon  Wooden  Piles  or  Stakes ; 
tho'  that  vaft  Mafs  of  Stone  is  extream  heavy.  This  Noble 
Edifice  is  inrich'd  with  feveral  fine  Pieces  of  Sculpture  and 
Painting,  and  adorn'd  with  rich  Tapeftry.  Here  you  may  fee 
the  fined  Marble,  Jafper  and  Porphyry  that  can  be :  But  this 
is  nothing  in  Comparifon  with  the  Mouldy  Crowns  that  are 
hoarded  up  under  the  Vaults  of  this  monftrous  Edifice.  The 
Admiralty-Houfe  is  likewife  very  fine,  as  well  as  the  Arfenal. 
The  Port  which  is  little  lefs  than  a  large  quarter  of  a  League 
in  Front,  was  covered  all  over  with  Ships,  in  fo  much  that 
one  might  eafily  Jump  from  one  to  another. 

In  this  City  I  faw  fome  neat  Churches,  not  to  fpeak  of 
a  Synagogue  of  the  true  Jews,  who  out  of  regard  to  their 
Antiquity  are  allow'd  the  publick  Exercife  of  their  Venerable 
Religion.  The  Roman  Catbolicks,  Lutherans,  &c.  are  tolerated 
to  Worfhip  God  in  their  way,  without  laying  the  Doors  of 
their  Meeting-Houfes  open,  or  ringing  Bells  or  Chimes.  I 
was  likewife  entertain'd  with  a  Sight  of  the  Houfes  for 
Widows  and  Orphans,  and  their  Bridewells  whether  for  the 
Punifhment  of  Rogues,  or  Female  Sinners,  who  are  forc'd  to 
Work  very  hard  to  expiate  their  Peccadillo's.  The  Exchange 
is  a  piece  of  Architecture,  large  enough  to  contain  eight 
thoufand  Men:   But  the  Statelieft  thing  I  faw  was  [217]  ten 


654  Some  New  Voyages 

or  twelve  Mufick-Honfes,  fo  call'd  from  certain  Mufical  Inftru- 
ments  forrily  Scrap'd  upon,  by  the  Sound  of  which  a  Gang  of 
nafty  Punks  infnare  fuch  as  have  the  courage  to  look  upon 
'em  without  Spitting  in  their  Faces.     This  gracious  Tribe 
affembles  in  the  Seraglio  as   foon   as  Night  approaches.     In 
fome   of   thefe   Mufak-Houfes   you   are   entertain' d   with   the 
Sound   of  an   Organ;   in  others  with  a  Harpficord  or   fome 
other  lame  Inftrument.     You  enter  into  a  large  Room  where 
the  frightful  Veftal  Ladies  fit,  rigg'd  with  all  forts  of  Colours 
and  Stuffs,  by  the  kind  affiftance  of  the  Jews  who  let  out  the 
Head-Dreffes  and  Suits  of  Cloaths,  that  have  been  kept  for 
that  ufe,  from  Father  to  Son,  ever  fince  the  Deftruction  of 
Jerufalem.     In  thefe  Seraglio's  every  body's  Welcome  for  the 
Spending  of  ten  or  twelve  Stivers,  which  he  rauft  lay  down  at 
his  firft  entry,  for  a  Glafs  of  Wine  that's  enough  to  Poifon 
an  Elephant.     Here  you'll  fee  a  Swinging  Raw-Bon'd  Sailor 
pop  in  with  his  Pipe  in  his  Jaws,  his  Hair  all  glittering  with 
Sweat,  and  his  Tar  Breeches  Glew'd  to  his  Thighs ;  in  which 
Pickle  he  makes  SS's  till  he  falls  flat  at  his  Miftriffes  Feet. 
Next    comes    a   Foot-Man    half   Muddled,   that   Sings    and 
Dances,  and   Swills  down   Brandy  to   make   himfelf   Sober. 
After  him  the  Stage  is  Trod  by  a  Soldier  that  Swaggers  and 
Storms,  and  makes  the  whole  Palace  tremble ;   or  elfe  by  a 
Company  of  Adventurers  muffled  up  in  their  Cloaks,  who 
come  to  play  the  Devil  with  three  or  four  Rogues,  and  get 
themfelves  knock'd  on  the  Head  by  fifty  that  out-do  Affes 
in  Brutifhnefs.     In  fine,  Sir,  the  whole  Chorus  is  a  Collection 
of  nafty  Mifcreants,  who  in  fpite  of  the  unfufferable  Funk  of 


,vel^-. 


'Tfe  flt/itiTietef peace,  £euiQ  a  cjreatf>Lf>e  &c 


/ 


>.Sl. 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  655 

Tobacco  and  Smell  of  nafty  Feet,  continue  in  that  Common 
Shore  of  Ordure  and  Nufance  till  two  a  Clock  in  the  Morn- 
ing, without  ever  difobliging  their  Stomachs.  [218]  This  Sir, 
is  the  whole  of  what  I  know  in  the  matter. 

As  I  pafs'd  thro'  this  famous  City,  I  met  with  fome  French 
Merchants  of  the  Catholick  Religion,  the  moft  considerable  of 
which  are  the  Sieurs  d'  Moracin,  and  d'  Arreche;  both  Bayonne 
Men,  and  perfons  of  Merit  and  Probity,  who  have  already 
purchas'd  a  great  Eftate,  and  a  very  reputable  Character.  I 
was  inform'd  that  there  were  a  great  many  French  Refugees 
in  this  City,  who  have  fet  up  Manufactures  that  inrich'd  fome 
and  ruin'd  others.  This  is  to  me  a  convincing  Proof  that  the 
Refugee  Trade  has  been  favourable  to  fome  and  fatal  to 
others ;  nay,  'tis  really  true,  that  fome  Refugees  who  brought 
Mony  into  Holland  are  now  in  want,  and  others  who  had  not 
a  Groat  in  France,  are  become  Crcefus^s  in  that  Republick. 

There's  no  Country  in  the  World  in  which  good  Inns  are 
fo  chargeable,  as  they  are  in  Holland.  There  you  muft  pay 
for  Bed  and  Fire,  in  proportion  to  your  Meals,  which  coft 
you  half  a  Ducatoon,  or  two  and  nine  pence  a  time :  So  that  a 
Gentleman  and  his  Servant  muft  lie  at  the  Charge  of  eight 
French  Livres  a  day,  for  Supper,  Dinner,  Bed  and  Fire. 

As  for  the  Dutch  Mony,  the  Value  of  it  is  as  follows. 

A  Ducatoon  is  worth  three  Guelders,  three  Stuivers. 

A  Rix  Dollar  paffes  for  fifty  Stuivers. 

A  Crown  for  40  Stuivers. 

A  Dollar  for  30  Stuivers. 

An  eight  and  twenty  Stuck  or  Piece,  28  Stuivers. 


656  Some  New  Voyages 

A  Guelder  piece  20  Stuivers. 

A  Stamp 'd  Schelling  6  Stuivers. 

An  Unftamp'd  Schelling,  5  Stuivers  4  Doits. 

[219]  A  Dubbelkie  2  Stuivers. 

A  Stuiver  8  Doits ;  which  makes  a  French  Sol  and  a  Liard ; 
for  five  French  Sous  make  but  four  D«fa&  Stuivers  ;  and  a  French 
Crown  of  60  Sow*  value  is  no  more  than  48  Stuivers. 

A  Gold  -Dwctf/  is  worth  5  Guelders  5  Stuivers. 

A  Lowis  D'or  paffes  for  9  Guelders  9  Stuivers. 

As  for  the  Meafures  of  Holland,  I  can  tell  you  with  refer- 
ence to  fome,  that  a  League  is  near  3800  Geometrical  Paces. 

An  Ell  is  a  French  Foot  ten  Inches  and  a  Line. 

A  Pound  is  equal  to  our  Paris  Pound. 

A  Pint  holds  much  the  fame  quantity  of  Liquor  with  a 
Paris  Chopine. 

This  is  all  the  account  I  can  give  you  of  Holland. 

When  I  fet  out  from  Amfterdam  to  Hamburg,  I  chofe  the 
eafyeft  and  cheapeft  way  of  Travelling,  (I  mean  by  Water.) 
I  had  refolv'd  indeed  to  Travel  by  Poft  Waggons  or  Coaches  ; 
but  that  refolution  was  prefently  drop'd,  when  I  was  advis'd 
that  in  Travelling  by  Land,  I  might  run  the  rifque  of  being 
ftop'd  in  the  Territories  of  fome  of  the  German  Princes,  who 
require  Paffports  of  all  Travellers.  This  wholefome  Advice 
fpar'd  both  my  Corps  and  my  Purfe :  For  to  have  gone  Poft, 
it  would  have  coft  me  for  my  felf  and  my  Servant  fourty 
Crowns,  whereas  it  coft  me  but  five  by  Water.  There  goes 
two  Dutch  Sloops  from  Amfterdam  to  Hamburg  every  Week, 
on  purpofe  to  carry  Paffengers,  who  may  hire  little  feperate 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  657 

Cabins,  fuch  being  made  in  the  Ship  for  the  Accommodation 
of  thofe  who  have  a  mind  to  be  private.  Thefe  Sloops  would 
be  admirably  well  Calculated  for  Sailing  up  the  South  fide  of 
the  River  of  St.  Laurence,  from  its  Mouth  to  Quebec;  and 
above  all,  from  Quebec  to  Monreal.  They  are  preferable  to 
our  Barques  for  that  Service ;  [220]  which  I'll  make  out  by 
five  or  fix  Reafons.  In  the  firft  place,  they  do  not  draw  half 
fo  much  Water  as  our  Barks  of  the  fame  Burden.  In  the 
next  place,  they'll  tack  to  the  four  Quarters  of  the  Wind  ; 
they  require  lefs  Rigging  and  a  fmaller  compliment  of  Hands 
than  our  Barques,  and  are  Work'd  with  lefs  Charge ;  they'll 
turn  their  Head  where  their  Stern  was  before  in  the  twinkling 
of  an  Eye,  whereas  our  Barques  can't  get  about  under  five  or 
fix  Minutes,  and  fometimes  will  not  tack  at  all ;  they  may  rub 
upon  Sand  or  Gravel  without  danger,  as  being  Built  of  half 
flat  Ribs,  whereas  our  Barks  being  round,  would  fplit  in 
pieces  upon  the  lead  touch.  Such,  Sir,  are  the  Advantages  of 
thefe  Flemijh  Veffels  beyond  ours ;  and  fo  you  may  fafely 
Write  to  the  Rochel  Merchants  who  Trade  to  Canada,  that 
they  would  find  'em  very  ferviceable  in  that  Country :  At  the 
fame  time,  you  may  oblige  'em  with  the  following  dimenfions 
of  that  fort  of  Shipping,  which  I  took  from  the  Veffel  I  was 
on  Board  of,  that  was  one  of  the  leaft  Size.  It  was  fourty  two 
Foot  long  from  the  Stern-poft  to  the  Head ;  the  Hold  was 
about  eight  Foot  broad  and  about  five  Foot  deep  :  The 
Cabin  in  the  Fore-Caftle  was  fix  Foot  long,  and  had  a  Chim- 
ney with  a  Funnel  and  Vent  at  the  bottom  of  the  Cape-Stane. 

The  Cabin  Abaft  was  of  the  fame  length,  and  its  Deck  was 

42 


658  Some  New  Voyages 

rais'd  three  Foot  higher  than  the  Fore-Caftle.  The  Helm  of 
the  frightful  Rudder  run  along  the  Roof  of  the  laft  Cabin. 
The  Ribs  of  this  little  Veffel,  were,  in  good  earneft,  as  flat  as 
the  Boats  in  the  Seine.  The  Side  was  about  a  Foot  and  a  half 
high;  the  Maft  was  16  Inches  diameter,  and  30  Foot  high; 
the  Sail  refembled  a  Re&angle  Triangle  in  its  Form.  The 
Veffel  was  provided  with  lee-boards,  or  a  fort  of  Wings  which 
the  Carpenters  [221]  know  very  well  how  to  ufe.  In  fine,  to 
inform  your  felf  more  particularly  of  the  matter,  you  may 
Write  to  Holland  for  a  Model  of  that  fort  of  Shipping  in 
Wood ;  for  a  French  Carpenter  will  never  make  any  thing  of 
the  beft  Verbal  Defcription  I  can  give.  The  cafe  is  the  fame 
as  with  fome  Mathematical  Inftruments,  of  which  the  acuteft 
men  can  never  form  a  juft  Idea  without  feeing  'em. 

In  Sailing  from  Amfterdam  to  Hamburg,  we  Steer  thro'  the 
Wat,  that  is,  between  the  Continent  and  a  firing  of  Iflands 
that  lye  about  two  or  three  hours  off  the  Terra  Firma ;  and 
round  which  the  Tide  ebbs  and  flows,  as  in  other  places. 
Between  the  Continent  and  thefe  Iflands  there  are  certain 
Channels,  which  are  deeper  than  the  other  places  on  the  right 
and  left,  for  thefe  are  dry  every  Tide.  Thefe  Channels  are 
eafily  diftinguifh'd  by  the  help  of  fome  Buoys  and  Mails 
Planted  upon  the  Flats.  At  half  Flood  you  may  weigh 
Anchor  and  Steer  along  the  Channels,  which  make  ftrange 
Windings  and  Elbows;  and  if  the  Wind  be  contrary,  you 
may  eafily  Board  along  by  the  help  of  the  Current,  till  it  is 
low  Water,  at  which  time  you  run  a  Ground  upon  the  Sand, 
and  are  left  quite  dry.     I  faw  above  three  hundred  of  thefe 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  659 

Flemi/h  Veffels  during  the  courfe  of  this  Navigation,  which  I 
take  to  be  as  fafe  as  that  of  a  River,  abating  for  ten  Leagues 
Sailing  when  we  crofs  over  from  the  laft  Ifland  to  the  Mouth 
of  the  Elbe.  The  Tide  rifes  three  Fathom  perpendicular 
from  the  Mouth  of  this  River  to  Aurenbourg,  which  lies  ten  or 
twelve  Leagues  above  Hamburg ;  fo  that  great  Ships  and  Men 
of  War  may  eafily  Sail  up  to  Hamburg. 

The  Paffage  from  Amfterdam  to  Hamburg  is  commonly 
accomplifh'd  in  feven  or  eight  days ;  for  in  thofe  Seas  the 
Wefterly  Winds  prevail  for  [222]  three  Quarters  of  the  Year. 
But  we  were  not  above  fix  days  in  our  Paffage,  notwithftand- 
ing  that  the  Mafter  of  our  Ship  was  oblig'd  to  lofe  a  Tide  in 
producing  his  Invoys  and  Bills  of  Lading  at  the  Town  of 
Stade,  which  lies  a  League  off  the  Elbe,  and  where  all  Ships 
are  oblig'd  to  pay  Toll  to  the  King  of  Sweden,  excepting  the 
Danes,  who  might  have  an  equal  Right  to  claim  fuch  a  Toll, 
if  they  made  ufe  of  the  opportunity  of  Commanding  the 
Paffage  of  this  River  with  the  Cannon  of  Glucftat. 

The  Elbe  is  a  large  League  over  at  its  Mouth,  and  at 
Spring-Tides  it  has  Water  enough  in  the  Channel  for  Ships 
of  fifty  or  fixty  Guns.  The  Entry  of  the  River  is  very  difficult 
and  dangerous,  by  reafon  of  an  infinity  of  moving  Sands, 
which  render  it  almoft  inaccefiible  in  a  Fogg,  as  well  as  in  the 
Night  time  ;  notwithftanding  the  precaution  of  Light  Houfes 
Built  pretty  far  out  at  Sea. 

Hamburg  is  a  large  City,  Fortified  irregularly  with  Ram- 
parts of  Earth.  I  pafs  over  in  Silence  the  Democratical 
Government  of  this  Hans  Town  and  its  Dependancies,  pre- 


660  Some  New  Voyages 

fuming  you  are  not  ignorant  of  fuch  things,  fince  the  Geog- 
raphers have  given  ample  Defcriptions  of  'em :  And  fhall 
content  my  felf  with  informing  you  that  the  Trade  of 
Hamburg  makes  it  a  confiderable  place ;  and  confidering  the 
advantage  of  its  Situation,  one  might  readily  guefs  fo  much. 
It  fupplies  almoft  all  Germany  with  all  forts  of  Foreign  Com- 
modities, by  the  conveniency  of  the  Elbe,  which  carries  flat 
bottom'd  Veffels  of  two  hundred  Tun  above  Drefden :  And 
one  may  juftly  fay  that  this  City  is  very  Serviceable  to  the 
Eleclor  of  Brandenburg,  in  regard  that  thefe  Veffels  go  up  to 
the  Afpree,  and  fome  other  Rivers  in  his  Territories.  The 
Hamburg  Merchants  Trade  to  all  parts  of  the  [223]  World, 
bateing  America.  They  fend  but  few  Ships  to  the  Eaft-Indies, 
or  the  upper  end  of  the  Mediterranean ;  but  they  fit  out  an 
infinity  of  Ships  for  Africa,  Mufcovy,  Spain,  France,  Portugal, 
Holland  and  England;  and  two  Fleets  every  Year  for  Arch- 
angel, where  they  arrive  at  the  latter  end  of  June,  and  the 
latter  end  of  September. 

This  little  Republick  keeps  four  Men  of  War  of  fifty 
Guns,  and  fome  light  Frigats  that  ferve  for  Convoys  to  their 
Merchantmen,  Bound  for  the  Streights,  or  for  the  Coaft  of 
Portugal  or  Spain;  where  the  Sally-Rovers  would  be  fure  to 
pick  'em  up  if  they  went  without  Convoys.  The  City  is 
neither  pretty  nor  ugly ;  but  mod  of  the  Streets  are  fo  nar- 
row, that  the  Coaches  rauft  ftop  or  put  back  every  foot.  It 
affords  good  Diverfion  enough  ;  for  commonly  you  have  Plays 
A6led  by  French  or  Italian  Aclors,  and  a  German  Opera; 
which  for  Houfe,  Theatre  and  Scenes,  may  vye  with  the  beft 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  66 1 

in  Europe.  'Tis  true,  the  Habits  of  the  Actours  are  as  irreg- 
ular as  their  Air  and  Meen ;  but  then  you  muft  confider 
that  thefe  two  Suit  one  another.  The  Neighbourhood  of 
Hamburg  is  truly  very  pretty  in  the  Summer  time,  by  reafon 
of  an  infinity  of  Country  Houfes,  adorn'd  with  excellent 
Gardens,  and  great  numbers  of  Fruit-Trees,  which  by  the 
afliftance  of  Art  produce  pretty  good  Fruit.  But  now  that  I 
am  fpeaking  of  the  Country  round  Hamburg,  I  can't  difmifs 
the  Subject  without  acquainting  you  with  one  thing  that  is 
uncommon.  In  the  Neighbourhood  of  Hamburg  there  are 
Fields  of  Battel,  retaining  to  the  Territories  of  Denmark  and 
Lubeck ;  in  which  private  Quarrels  are  adjufted  before  an  in- 
finite number  of  Spectators,  notice  being  given  by  the  Sound 
of  a  Trumpet  fome  days  before  the  Champions  enter  the 
Lifts.  One  remarkable  Circumftance  [224]  is,  that  the  Com- 
batants, whether  on  Foot  or  on  Horfe-Back,  implore  the 
Mediation  of  two  Seconds,  only  in  order  to  be  Judges  of  the 
thrufts,  and  to  part  'em  when  four  drops  of  Blood  are  fpilt; 
fo  that  the  Adventurers  retire  upon  the  leaft  fcratch.  If  one 
of  'em  falls  upon  the  Ground,  the  Conqueror  returns  to  the 
Territories  of  Hamburg,  and  makes  a  Triumphal  Proceftion  to 
that  City,  while  the  Air  rings  with  acclamations  of  Joy  from 
the  Spectators.  Thefe  Tragedies  are  not  unfrequent ;  for 
Hamburg  being  reforted  to  by  an  infinite  number  of  Foreign- 
ers and  Strangers,  fome  diforder  or  other  always  happens, 
which  is  redrefs'd  that  way.  In  former  times,  the  Danes, 
Swedes  and  Germans,  us'd  to  repair  to  the  above  mention'd 
Fields  to  adjuft  the  Quarrels  they  had  in  their  own  Countries, 


662  Some  New  Voyages 

where  Duelling  was  prohibited  under  fevere  Penalties.  But 
the  Soveraigns  of  thofe  Countries  have  fince  Stiffled  fuch 
Practices,  by  declaring  that  upon  their  return  they  fhould  be 
as  feverely  punifh'd,  as  if  the  Action  had  been  in  their  own 
Territories. 

After  ftaying  five  or  fix  days  at  Hamburg,  I  took  leave  of 
that  City  and  fet  out  for  Lubec  in  a  Poft  Waggon,  that  goes 
thither  every  day.  Each  place  in  the  Coach  is  a  Crown  and  a 
half.  We  arriv'd  that  fame  day  at  Lubec,  and  when  we  came 
to  the  Gates,  were  ask'd  who  we  were ;  upon  which  every  one 
gave  a  true  account  of  their  Country  and  Profeflion ;  but  the 
fear  of  being  ftop'd  diffuaded  me  from  being  fo  fincere.  To 
be  free  with  you,  Sir,  I  plaid  the  Jefuit  a  little ;  for  having 
guarded  my  Confcience  with  a  good  meaning,  I  roundly  told 
'em  I  was  a  Portuguefe  Merchant,  and  fo  got  clear  by  fuffering 
the  affront  of  being  hooted  at  for  a  Jew.  In  fine,  we  were 
all  fuffer'd  to  pafs  without  opening  our  Portmanteau's. 

[225]  The  City  of  Lubec  is  neither  fo  great  nor  fo  popu- 
lous as  Hamburg;  but  its  Streets  are  broader  and  ftraighter, 
and  its  Houfes  are  much  finer.  The  Ships  that  arrive  in 
this  Port  are  rang'd  all  in  a  row,  upon  a  very  pretty  Key  that 
extends  from  one  end  of  the  Town  to  the  other ;  and  that  in 
a  River,  that  in  my  Opinion  is  deeper  than  'tis  broad.  The 
greateft  Commerce  of  this  Place  retains  to  the  Baltick  Sea, 
which  is  not  above  two  Leagues  diftant.  The  place  from 
whence  I  now  Write,  is  Seated  exactly  at  the  Mouth  of  this 
little  River ;  which  your  great  Ships  can't  enter,  by  reafon 
of  a  Bar  that  has  not  above  fourteen  or  fifteen  Foot  Water; 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  663 

even  when  the  Wind  Springing  from  the  Main  fwells  this 
River  after  the  fame  manner  as  the  Tides  of  the  Ocean.  To 
morrow  I  think  to  Imbarque  in  a  Frigat  that  carries  Paflengers 
from  hence  to  Copenhagen,  provided  the  Southerly  Winds  con- 
tinue. I  have  taken  the  great  Cabin  for  two  Ducatoons,  which 
is  not  above  four  French  Crowns.  Ducats  are  the  moft  current 
and  convenient  Coin  in  all  the  Northern  Countries ;  for  they 
pafs  in  Holland,  Denmark  and  Sweden,  and  in  all  the  Principal- 
ities of  Germany:  But  a  Traveller  muft  take  care  that  they  are 
full  Weight,  for  otherwife  the  People  will  fcruple  to  take  'em, 
or  at  leaft  cut  off  fome  Sous  in  the  Change. 

To  conclude ;  I  have  met  with  good  Inns  hitherto  in  all 
the  Towns  I  pafs'd  thro';  and  drank  good  Bourdeaux  Wine 
both  in  Hamburg  and  Lubec.  The  People  of  the  Country 
drink  likewife  Rhenifh  and  Mofelle  Wines ;  but  to  my  mind 
they  are  better  to  Boil  Carp  in  than  for  any  thing  elfe.  Adieu, 
Sir,  I  am  now  call'd  upon  to  pack  up  my  Baggage :  I  hope 
to  fee  Copenhagen  the  day  after  to  morrow,  if  fo  be  that  this 
Southerly  Wind  ftands  our  Friend,  as  much  as  I  am, 

Sir,  Tours,  &c. 


664  Some  New  Voyages 


[226]      LETTER   III. 
Dated  at  Copenhagen,  Sep.  12  1694. 

Containing  a  Defcription  of  the  Port  and  City  of  Copenhagen,  a 
View  of  the  Danifh  Court ;  and  of  the  Humours,  Cuftoms, 
Commerce,  Forces,  &c.  of  the  Danes. 

SIR, 

THE  South-Eaft  Wind  that  blew  when  I  Wrote  laft,  wafted 
me  into  the  Port  of  this  good  City  of  Copenhagen  ;  after 
which  it  took  leave  of  us,  and  purfued  its  courfe  to  the  North- 
ern Countries  of  Sweden,  where  its  thawing  influence  had  been 
expected  for  fome  days.  This  little  Voyage,  which  was  over 
in  eight  and  fourty  hours,  afforded  me  diverfion  enough ;  for 
I  had  the  pleafure  of  viewing  to  the  Lar  Board,  or  on  the  left 
hand,  fome  Danifi  Ifles,  which  feem'd  to  be  pretty  Populous, 
if  we  may  judge  of  that  from  the  great  number  of  Villages 
that  I  defcry'd  upon  'em,  when  we  Sweep'd  along  their  Coaft 
in  clear  Weather  with  a  frefh  Gale.  I  take  it,  the  crofling  of 
this  Sea  muft  be  fomewhat  dangerous  in  Winter,  by  reafon  of 
the  Banks  of  Sand  that  are  met  with  in  fome  places :  For  the 
Nights  being  long,  and  the  Winds  high  in  that  Seafon,  no 
Precaution  whatfoever  would  rid  me  of  the  fears  of  running 
upon  the  Sands,  till  I  arriv'd  at  this  City. 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  665 

As  foon  as  I  fet  my  foot  on  Shoar,  the  Waiters  came  and 
view'd  my  Portmanteau's,  in  which  they  found  more  Sheets 
of  Paper  than  Piftoles.  [227]  The  next  day  after  my  Arrival, 
I  waited  upon  Monfieur  de  Bonrepaux,  who  was  then  in  the 
Country  for  the  recovery  of  his  Health :  And  for  want  of 
whom  the  Navy  of  France  has  fuftain'd  an  irreparable  lofs.1 
This  done,  I  return'd  to  this  City,  which  may  juftly  be  lifted 
in  the  number  of  thofe  that  we  in  Europe  call  great  and  pretty. 
'Tis  well  and  regularly  Fortified,  and  'tis  pity  'tis  not  Wall'd 
with  Stone,  which  is  likewife  a  defect  in  the  Cittadel  that 
commands  the  Mouth  of  the  Harbour.  Copenhagen  has  one 
of  the  beft  Harbours  in  the  World,  for  both  Nature  and  Art 
have  confpir'd  to  fhelter  it  from  all  Infults.  The  City  ftands 
upon  a  fmooth  level  Ground,  the  Streets  are  broad,  and 
almoft  all  the  Houfes  are  three  Story  high,  and  built  of  Brick. 
Here  you  may  fee  three  very  fine  places;  and  amongft  the 
reft,  the  King's  Market,  fo  call'd  from  his  Statue  on  Horfe- 
Back,  which  is  there  erected.  This  Place  is  furrounded  with 
fome  fine  Houfes,  and  Monfieur  de  Bonrepaux  Lodges  in  one 
of  'em,  which  is  very  large  ;  and  indeed  that  Ambaffadour  has 
occafion  for  fo  great  a  Houfe,  confidering  the  numeroufnefs 
of  his  Retinue.     The  Magnificence  of  his  Table  is  fuitable 


1  Like  Lahontan,  Francois  Dusson,  Sieur  de  Bonrepaux,  was  of  Gascon  birth. 
By  sheer  ability  he  had  raised  himself  from  a  humble  position  in  the  office  of  the 
marine  to  be  chief  of  the  French  naval  squadron.  He  was  also  a  diplomatist  of  abil- 
ity, and  had  been  sent  on  important  missions  to  England  (1685-87)  ;  from  1693-97 
he  was  French  ambassador  to  Holland.  As  a  patron  of  letters,  he  became  interested 
in  Lahontan,  and  endeavored  to  reestablish  his  credit  at  the  French  court.  See 
Macaulay's  brilliant  characterization,  in  his  History  of  England.  —  Ed. 


666  Some  New  Voyages 

to  the  Grandeur  of  his  Equipage :  And  every  body  pays  him 
the  honours  and  efteem  that  his  Character  merits.  But  I'll 
infift  no  longer  upon  that  Head. 

The  City  of  Copenhagen  is  very  advantageoufly  Seated,  as 
you  may  fee  in  the  Map  of  the  Ifle  of  Zealand ;  and  lies  very 
conveniently  for  Merchantmen  which  come  without  any  diffi- 
culty up  to  the  Canals  or  Ditches  that  are  cut  thro'  it.  It 
contains  very  fine  Edifices ;  particularly  the  Churches  of 
Notredame  and  St.  Nicholas,  which  are  both  great  and  fine. 
The  round  Tower  paffes  for  an  admirable  piece  of  Archi- 
tecture, and  has  [228]  a  Stair-Cafe  upon  which  a  Coach  may 
drive  up  to  the  top.  The  Library  which  ftands  in  the  middle 
of  the  round  Tower  is  well  Stock'd  with  Books  and  valuable 
Manufcripts.  The  Exchange  is  an  admirable  Fabrick,  in 
regard  both  to  its  length,  and  its  Situation  in  the  pleafanteft 
part  of  the  Town.  As  for  the  Royal  Palace,  its  Antiquity 
recommends  it  as  much  to  me,  as  if  it  had  been  Built  after 
the  Modern  way :  For  in  the  Maffy  Fabrick  of  a  Caftle,  'tis 
enough  if  the  due  Symmetry  of  Proportion  be  obferv'd.  The 
Furniture  and  Pictures  in  this  Caftle  are  admirably  fine ;  and 
the  Royal  Clofet  is  fill'd  with  an  infinity  of  very  curious  Rari- 
ties. In  the  King's  Stables  there  is  now  but  a  hundred  Coach- 
Horfes,  that  is,  thirteen  or  fourteen  Set  of  different  forts  and 
fizes;  and  a  hundred  and  fifty  Saddle-Horfes :  But  both  the 
one  and  the  other  are  equally  fine.  Chriftians-Fawe,  the  Second 
City,  is  fever'd  from  Copenhagen  by  a  great  Canal  of  running 
Water.  The  Royal  Palace  of  Rozemburg,  which  ftands  at  one 
end  of  the  City,  is  adorn'd  with  a  charming  Garden. 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  667 

I  come  now  to  give  you  the  Characters  of  the  Princes  and 

Princeffes  at  the  Court  of  Denmark.     'Tis  needlefs  to  take 

notice  of  the  Valour  and  Vigilancy  of  the  King,  for  the  two 

chief  Qualities  of  that  Monarch  are  fufficiently  known  to  all 

the  World.1     I  mall  therefore  only  acquaint  you  that  he  is  a 

Perfon  of  great  Judgment  and  Capacity,  and  intirely  Wrap'd 

up  in  the  Interefts  of  his  Subjects,  who  look  upon  him  as  their 

Father  and  Deliverer.     He  has  all  the  Qualities  of  a  good 

General,  and  is  affable  and  generous  to  the  laft  degree.     He 

fpeaks  with  equal  facility,  the  Danifli,  Swedifti,  Latin,  German, 

Englifh   and    French    Languages.      The   Queen   is   the   moft 

AccompliftVd  Princefs  in  the  World;    and  fo  I  have  [229] 

faid  all  in  all.     The  Royal  Prince  is  a  Son  worthy  of  fo  great 

a  King  for  his  Father,  and  fuch  a  good  and  vertuous  Queen 

for  his  Mother ;  as  you  have  heard  it  proclaim'd  by  as  many 

Tongues  as  there  are  Heads  in  France.     He  is  a  Mafter  of 

Learning,  and   has  a  quick  Apprehenfion  joyn'd  to  a  fweet 

Temper.     His  Manners  are  as  Royal  as  his  Perfon,  and  all 

that  fee  him  wilh  him  that  Profperity  and  Happinefs  that  his 

Phyfiognomy   promifes.      Prince  Chriflian  is  a  fweet  lovely 

Prince,  as  well  as   Prince   Charles  his  younger  Brother:   A 

certain  Air  of  Affability  fits  upon  their  Foreheads  and  charms 

Mankind.      Prince  William  the  youngeft  Brother  is  a  very 

pretty  Child.     Princefs  Sophia,  who  is  commonly  call'd  the 

Royal  Princefs,  has  truly  a  Royal  Air:    She  is  Handfome, 

Young,  well  Shap'd  and  Witty  as  an  Angel :  Which  is  enough 

to  entitle  her  to  a  Preference  before  all  the  Princeffes  upon 


1  For  the  king  of  Denmark,  see  p.  3,  note  2,  ante.  —  Ed. 


668  Some  New  Voyages 

Earth,  not  to  mention  a  thoufand  other  good  qualities,  the 
Relation  of  which  would  prove  too  bulky  for  a  Mijfive.  Let's 
therefore  call  another  Subject. 

One  may  live  in  this  Country  for  almoft  nothing,  notwith- 
ftanding  that  good  Fifh  is  fomewhat  dear :  In  the  beft  Ordi- 
naries about  Town  you  pay  but  fifteen  or  fixteen  Sous  a  Meal. 
The  Butchers  Meat  of  this  place  is  neither  fo  juicy  nor  fo 
nourifhing  as  that  in  France;  but  their  Poultry,  their  frefh 
Water-Fowl,  their  Hares  and  their  Partridges  are  exceeding 
good.  The  beft  Claret  cofts  but  fifteen  Sous  a  Bottle.  A 
Hackney-Coach  may  be  hir'd  for  a  Crown  a  day,  and  fixty 
Livres  a  Month.  The  Water  of  this  place  is  muddy  and 
heavy,  and  for  that  reafon  we  have  recourfe  to  the  Beer,  which 
is  clear  and  wholefome,  and  very  cheap.  The  French  Refu- 
gees in  Copenhagen  are  allow'd  the  free  exercife  of  their 
Religion,  under  the  direction  of  Monfieur  [230]  de  la  Placette 
a  Minifter  of  Beam,  who  has  a  very  good  Penfion  from  the 
Queen,  for  Preaching  in  a  publick  Church,  of  which  her  Self 
is  Protectrefs. 

Commonly  the  King  paffes  the  Summer  at  his  Country 
Seats,  fometimes  at  Yegresburg,  fometimes  at  Fredericsburg,  and 
fometimes  at  Cronenburg.  There's  fcarce  any  Prince  in  the 
World  that  has  better  Accommodation  for  Dear-Hunting, 
than  the  King  of  Denmark:  For  all  his  Parks  are  full  of 
broad  Roads  for  purfuing  the  Chace  ;  befides  that,  the  Danifh 
Horfe  have  a  long  ftretch  of  a  Gallop,  which  is  very  conven- 
ient for  Hunters ;  and  the  Dogs  of  that  Country  are  fcarce 
ever  faulty.     The  King's  Table  is  as  nobly  Served  up,  as  you 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  669 

can  well  imagine :  So  that  when  he  returns  from  Hunting  he 
finds  a  frefh  Pleafure  in  feeding  on  Angelical  Fare.  He  is 
frequently  imploy'd  in  reviewing  his  Troops,  and  vifiting  his 
Forts,  Magazines  and  Arfenals ;  and  fometimes  he  goes  a 
Fowling  with  his  Courtiers.  About  two  Months  ago  I  faw 
him  Shoot  about  a  quarter  of  a  League  out  of  Town :  Upon 
which  occafion  a  Wood  Fowl  as  big  as  a  Cock  was  plac'd 
upon  the  top  of  a  Maft,  and  the  King  Shot  at  it  firft  and  took 
away  a  piece  of  its  Neck  with  his  Ball ;  after  which  his  Court- 
iers Shot  fo  dexteroufly  that  there  was  nothing  left  but  a  little 
bit  of  the  Fowl,  which  the  King  hit  at  laft,  after  a  great  many 
Sports-Men  had  attempted  it  in  vain. 

Moft  of  the  People  in  this  place  underftand  French ;  and 
perhaps  the  Gentlemen  of  the  Royal  Academy  are  not  better 
Skill'd  in  the  Purity  and  Delicacy  of  that  Language,  than  the 
Countefs  de  Frizs;  who  by  her  Wit,  Birth  and  Beauty  is 
juftly  accounted  the  Pearl  and  Ornament  of  the  Court.  The 
Danes  are  a  proper  fort  of  People ;  they  are  civil,  honourable, 
brave  and  active.  They  have  fomewhat  that's  very  ingaging 
[231]  in  their  Carriage,  and  bears  an  Air  of  affability  and 
complaifance.  I  take  'em  to  be  a  fenfible  thinking  fort  of 
People,  and  free  of  that  unfufferable  affectiation  and  vanity 
that  gives  a  difrelifh  to  the  Actions  of  other  Nations  :  At  leaft 
'tis  apparent  that  a  difengag'd  genteel  Air  mines  thro'  all 
their  Actions.  The  Danifh  Ladies  are  very  handfome  and 
lively  ;  generally  they  are  very  witty  and  brisk,  and  a  fparkling 
gayety  hangs  very  agreeably  about  'em,  notwithstanding  that 
the  nature  of  their  Climate  do's  not  promife  it.     The  Daniflt 


670  Some  New  Voyages 

Men  complain  that  they  are  too  haughty  and  nice  in  their 
Condutl ;  and  indeed  they  have  reafon  to  charge  'em  with  a 
fcrupulous  nicety;  but  as  for  their  Pride  I  know  nothing  of 
it.  They  receive  almoft  no  vifits,  and  'tis  alleg'd  that  the 
reafon  of  this  referv'dnefs  proceeds  not  fo  much  from  the 
defign  of  avoiding  the  occafion  of  Temptation,  as  from  the 
fear  of  being  Scandalis'd ;  for  Slander  reigns  in  this  Country 
as  much  as  elfewhere.  In  fine,  they  have  more  Vertue  and 
Wifdom  than  they  mould  have,  in  bearing  the  Sighs  of  Lovers 
without  being  mov'd.  One  may  fee  'em  often  enough  at  the 
Houfe  of  Mr.  de  Guldenlew,  the  King's  natural  Brother  and 
Viceroy  of  Norway.  That  Gentleman,  who  indeed  is  one  of 
the  Statelieft  Men  in  Europe,  takes  pleafure  in  keeping  a 
Table  every  day  for  eighteen  perfons,  and  regaling  the  Ladies 
and  Perfons  of  Quality.  After  Dinner  the  Gentlemen  make 
Matches  to  Game  or  Walk  out  with  the  Ladies.  The  fame 
Entertainment,  and  the  fame  fort  of  Company  is  to  be  met 
with  at  the  Count  de  Revenclaw's,  who  is  look'd  upon  as  one 
of  the  moft  Zealous  and  Capable  Minifters  that  the  King  has. 
Thefe  Dinners  or  Entertainments  are  fomewhat  too  long  for 
me,  who  am  accuftom'd  to  Dine  Poft,  I  mean,  to  fill  my  Belly 
in  five  or  fix  [232]  Minutes;  for  commonly  they  laft  above 
two  hours.  The  excellent  Meffes  which  are  then  Serv'd  up 
in  great  plenty,  Feaft  at  once  the  tafte,  the  fight  and  the  fmell. 
For ;  in  fine,  there's  no  difference  between  thofe  Tables  and 
the  beft  about  the  French  Court,  unlefs  it  be  that  the  former 
have  great  pieces  of  Salt  Beef  fet  upon  'em  ;  and  I  truly  think 
the  Danes  would  be  Guilty  of  an  indifcreet  Action  in  eating  of 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  671 

it  fo  heartily,  if  they  did  not  take  care  to  wafh  the  Salt  out  of 
their  Throat  with  good  Liquor. 

Among  the  different  forts  of  Wine  that  are  commonly 
drank  at  Copenhagen,  the  Cabers  and  the  Pontac  are  the  only 
Wines  that  fuit  a  French  Man's  Palate.  It  feems  to  be  an 
inviolable  Cuftom  in  all  the  Northern  Countries,  to  fwill  down 
two  or  three  good  Draughts  of  Beer,  before  they  turn  to 
Wine,  which  they  value  too  much  to  fpoil  it  with  Water.  I 
am  told  that  in  former  times  they  us'd  to  fit  four  or  five  hours 
at  Meals,  and  drink  briskly  all  the  while,  in  fpite  of  the  threats 
of  the  Gout.  But  now  adays  that  cuftom  is  in  difufe ;  befides, 
the  Glaffes  are  fo  fmall  and  the  number  of  the  Healths  fo 
moderate,  that  they  rife  from  Table  in  very  good  order :  Not 
but  that  fometimes  upon  extraordinary  Solemnities,  the  Guefts 
lye  under  an  indifpenfible  Obligation  to  drink  huge  Bumpers 
in  certain  Wellcomes;  which  in  ancient  times  were  in  ufe  among 
the  Grecians  under  the  name  of  dya^y  8ui)uovos.  I  tremble  when 
I  call  to  mind  thefe  Bumpers,  ever  fince  a  fatal  accident  befell 
me  about  two  Months  ago  in  Mr.  de  Guldenlew's  Houfe: 
That  Gentleman  regal'd  fome  eighteen  or  twenty  Perfons  of 
both  Sexes,  in  Solemnifing  the  Birth  of  his  Children ;  and 
Fate  would  have  it  fo  that  I  had  the  honour  to  be  one  of  the 
Male  Guefts,  who  were  all  oblig'd,  excepting  Mr.  de  Bonrepos, 
to  drink  two  dozen  of  Bumpers  to  the  Health  of  the  prefent 
and  abfent  [233]  Children.  I  proteit,  I  was  very  much  out  of 
Countenance,  and  would  have  almoft  chofe  to  drink  up  the 
River  of  St.  Laurence,  rather  than  thefe  Fountains  of  Wine ; 
for  there  was  no  poflibility  of  baulking  a  Glafs.     'Twas  then 


672  Some  New  Voyages 

too  late  to  reflect  upon  the  ftrange  Pofture  I  was  in  ;  for  as  the 
Proverb  goes,  the  Wine  was  drawn,  and  I  was  oblig'd  to 
drink  it ;  I  mean,  I  was  oblig'd  to  do  as  the  reft  did.  How- 
ever, towards  the  conclusion  of  Dinner  they  put  round  a  great 
Wellcome  that  held  two  Bottles;  and  all  the  Gentlemen  were 
oblig'd  to  drink  it  brim-ful,  as  a  Health  to  the  Royal  Family ; 
God  knows,  the  defpairing  Mariner  never  trembled  more 
gracefully  upon  the  difmal  Profpect  of  a  Ship-Wrack,  than 
I  did  upon  the  approach  of  the  Bumper.  In  fine,  I  confefs 
to  you,  I  drank  it,  but  for  the  latter  part  of  the  Story  I  beg 
your  Pardon ;  for  I  have  no  mind  to  glory  in  the  Heroick 
Aclion  that  I  did  in  imitation  of  three  or  four  more,  who  dif- 
charg'd  their  Confcience  juft  under  the  Table  as  gracefully  as 
I.  After  that  fatal  blow,  I  was  fo  mortified  that  I  durft  not 
appear ;  nay,  I  had  a  ftrong  fancy  to  leave  the  Country  out  of 
hand,  and  would  certainly  have  done  it,  if  my  Pot  Companions 
and  thofe  who  ftiar'd  the  difgrace,  had  not  diffuaded  me  by 
an  infinity  of  German  Proverbs  that  feem'd  to  applaud  the 
generous  Exploit ;  among  which  the  following  had  the  greateft 
influence,  viz.  If  we  are  ajham'd  in  taking  too  much,  we  ought  to 
place  our  Glory  in  giving  it  up  again. 

The  Danifli  Gentry  live  very  handfomely  upon  their  Land- 
Rents,  and  the  Peafants  want  for  nothing,  no  more  than  ours, 
unlefs  it  be  for  Mony.  They  have  a  fufficient  Stock  of  Grain 
and  Cattel,  which  ferves  to  maintain  'em  in  a  grofs  way,  and 
to  pay  the  Landlord's  Rents.  Is  not  it  enough  that  they  are 
well  clad  and  well  fed  ?  [234]   I  would  fain  know  what  advan- 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  673 

tage  the  Dutch  Boors  reap  from  their  Crowns,  while  they  feed 

upon  nothing  but  Cheefe  and  Butter-  ... 

r  °  *  rompernick  is  a  fort 

fpread    upon     *  Pompernick.      If    their    of  Bread>  as  bhck  as  a 

Crowns  and  Dollars  ferve  only  to  pay     Chimney,  as    heavy  as 

the  Taxes  of  the  Republick,  they  muft    Lead,  and  as  hard  as 

be  very  Blind  in  hugging  a  Shadow  of 

Liberty,  which  they  purchafe  at  the  expence  of  the  Subftance 

that  maintains  both  Life  and  Health. 

The  beft  thing  the  Danes  ever  did,  was  that  of  fetting  their 
Kings  upon  the  fame  Foot  as  they  now  are.  The  Prince  that 
fways  the  Scepter  at  prefent,  exercifes  an  Arbitrary  Power 
with  as  much  Equity  as  his  Predeceffor.  Before  their  Gov- 
ernment was  reduc'd  to  this  happy  lay,  the  Kingdom  was 
overrun  with  fa&ious  Clubs  and  Civil  Wars;  the  State  and 
Society  it  felf  was  all  in  diforder ;  the  Grandees  crufh'd  the 
inferiour  Subjects,  and  even  the  Kings  themfelves  were  oblig'd 
to  ftoop  (if  I  may  fo  fpeak)  to  the  Laws  of  their  Subjects. 
In  a  word,  their  Eyes  being  dazled  with  that  Phantafm  of 
Liberty,  which  by  a  treacherous  luftre  impofes  upon  feveral 
other  Nations ;  they  were  thereby  render'd  Slaves  to  fo  many 
petty  Kings,  who  a6led  like  abfolute  Soveraigns  without  fear- 
ing the  limited  Power  of  their  Monarchs. 

At  prefent,  the  King  of  Denmark's  Revenue  amounts  to 

five  Millions  of  Crowns.     This  I  know  to  be  a  juft  and  true 

State  of  his  Treafury  :  He  maintains  near  thirty  thoufand  Men 

of  regular  Troops,  in  good  order,  well  difciplin'd  and  well 

pay'd ;   befides  the   Militia  who  are  always  ready  to  March 
43 


674  Some  New  Voyages 

upon  a  call.  Nay  farther,  he  may  raife  fourty  thoufand  Men 
more,  upon  occafion,  without  difpeopling  his  Country.  His 
[235]  Officers  are  provided  for  at  a  reafonable  rate,  efpecially 
the  Marine  Officers  who  are  not  allotted,  (as  ours  are  in 
France,)  any  greater  Pay  than  what  bears  a  juft  proportion  to 
the  poor  Captains  of  Foot  and  Horfe,  who  are  oblig'd  to 
pinch  hard  to  anfwer  the  Charges  that  the  Sea  Captains  are 
exempted  from.  'Tis  faid,  the  King  of  Denmark  finds  his 
account  in  letting  out  his  Troops  to  his  Allies,  not  with 
regard  to  the  Mony  pay'd  on  that  account,  but  in  regard  that 
by  this  means  he  keeps  his  Troops  in  exercife,  inures  'em  to 
the  hardfhips  of  War,  and  makes  'em  compleat  Mafters  of  the 
Military  Art;  in  order  to  make  ufe  of  'em  upon  occafion. 
You  muft  know,  Sir,  his  Danifh  Majefty  is  above  that  ridicu- 
lous Scruple  that  moft  other  Princes  make  to  imploy  For- 
eigners or  thofe  of  another  Religion  in  their  Service.  The 
Meffieurs  de  Cormaillon,  Dumeni,  L'dbat,  and  feveral  others 
have  confiderable  Pofts  in  his  Army,  notwithftanding  that  they 
are  French  Men  and  Papifts.  From  hence  it  appears  that  this 
Monarch  is  convinc'd  that  Men  of  Honour  will  rather  differve 
their  Religion  than  act  counter  to  the  Fidelity  due  to  their 
Mafter  :  And  to  be  plain  with  you,  I  believe  the  King  is  in  the 
right  of  it :  For  fince  the  Foundation  of  all  Religion  confifts 
in  the  Fidelity  we  owe  to  God,  to  our  Friend  and  to  our  Bene- 
factor; nothing  will  be  able  to  unhinge  a  Man  of  Honour,  or 
to  tempt  him  to  act  contrary  to  his  Duty.  I  will  not  pretend 
to  meafure  the  actions  of  others  by  my  own  Standard ;  but 
for  my  own  part,  I  affure  you  if  I  had  lifted  my  felf  in  the 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  675 

Service  of  the  Turks,  with  the  liberty  of  continuing  Popifh ; 
and  if  Orders  were  iffued  forth  for  laying  Rome  in  Afhes,  I 
would  be  the  firft  Man  to  fet  fire  to  it,  in  obedience  to  the 
Grand  Seignior's  Orders.     But  we  have  enough  of  that. 

[236]  The  Danifli  Laws,  contain'd  in  the  Latin  Book  I 
now  fend  you,  will  appear  to  you  fo  clear,  fo  diftinct,  and  fo 
wifely  Concerted,  that  they'll  feem  to  have  proceeded  from  the 
Mouth  of  St.  Paul:  You'll  find  by  them  that  this  Country 
do's  not  countenance  Solicitors,  Barrifters,  and  the  reft  of  the 
litigious  Tribe.  I  own  indeed  that  the  Law  relating  to  Man- 
Slaughter  is  unreafonable ;  for  you'll  find  that  by  the  Pen- 
alty therein  enacted,  a  Man  that  kills  his  Enemy  runs  much 
the  fame  rifque  as  if  he  had  fuffer'd  himfelf  to  be  kill'd. 

The  Court  of  Denmark  makes  as  good  a  Figure  in  pro- 
portion to  its  Greatnefs,  as  any  other  Court  in  Europe.  The 
Lords  and  Courtiers  have  very  magnificent  Equipages ;  and 
which  is  lingular,  none  but  thofe  of  the  Royal  Family  are 
allow'd  to  give  a  Red  Livery.  The  time  of  appearing  at 
Court  is  from  Noon  to  half  an  hour  after  one,  or  thereabouts; 
during  which  time  the  King  appears  in  a  Hall  fill'd  with  very 
fine  Gentlemen.  Here  you'll  fee  nothing  but  Imbroidery  and 
Lace  after  the  neweft  Fafhion.  The  Foreign  Minifters  make 
their  appearance  at  the  fame  time,  for  the  King  do's  'em  the 
honour  of  hearing  them  Talk  with  a  great  deal  of  Pleafure. 
There  are  but  few  Knights  of  the  Order  of  the  Elephant  to 
be  feen  at  Court,  by  reafon  that  the  Dignity  is  beftow'd  only 
upon  Perfons  of  the  firft  Rank.  This  Order  may  juftly  be 
call'd  the  nobleft  in  Europe,  and  lefs  degenerate  than  the  reft; 


676  Some  New  Voyages 

infomuch,  that  of  thirty  four  Knights  Companions,  which 
make  up  the   Compliment  of  the  Order,  three  fourths  are 

Soveraign  Princes.  The  Order  of  *  Dane- 
*DanebroulLjIgnifies  brQuk  js  more  commoil)  and  confequently 
the  White  Order.  r   . 

lefs  considerable ;  tho  after  all,  the  Knights 

inverted  with  that  Collar,  [237]  are  intitled  to  feveral  great 
Prerogatives  and  marks  of  Preheminence. 

The  natural  Sons  of  the  Kings  of  Denmark,  bear  the  Title 

of  t  Guldenlew  and  High  Excellence,  *  and 
t  Guldenlew  fignifies  thdr  Ladie§  ^rQ  difl-ingUihVd  by  the  Com- 
a  Golden  Lion. 

pellation   of  Higo    Grace.      1  he   prelent 

*  Which  is  equivalent     King  has  two  natural  Sons,  whofe  Merit 
0     e     erman     ig  -      jeaves  ^\\  Expreffion  far  behind  it.     The 
nefs.  ;  .... 

eldeft  Serves  in  France  with  all  imaginable 

Applaufe.  The  Second  who  is  but  fifteen  years  of  Age  and 
continues  here,  is  a  very  promifing  Youth  :  He  has  a  wonder- 
ful deal  of  Senfe  and  Wit ;  his  Perfon  is  Handfome  and  well 
Shap'd ;  he  is  poffefs'd  of  all  the  Qualities  that  ingage  the 
tender  Sex;  his  Meen  is  perfectly  charming;  in  a  word,  he  is 
one  of  the  compleateft  young  Gentlemen  I  ever  faw.  He  is 
nominated  High  Admiral  of  Denmark  ;  and,  which  is  very 
furprifing,  he  is  better  vers'd  in  the  Mathematicks  and  the  Art 
of  Building  Ships,  than  the  ableft  Matters.  In  the  King  of 
Denmark 's  Dominions  there  are  two  Popifh  Churches  pub- 
lickly  Tolerated  ;  one  at  Glucftat  and  the  other  at  Altena. 

The  Air  of  this  Country  is  very  wholfome  for  thofe  who 
live  foberly  ;  but  it  has  a  contrary  effect  upon  difcontented 
Perfons.     The  only  Difeafe  they  complain  of  is  the  Scurvy ; 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  677 

which  the  Phyficians  impute  to  a  foul  nafty  Air  loaded  with  an 
infinity  of  thick  and  condenfated  Vapours,  which  joyn  their 
Forces  upon  the  Surface  of  the  Earth,  and  infinuate  them- 
felves  into  the  Lungs  along  with  the  Air :  They  plead  that 
their  Air  thus  polluted,  joyns  in  with  the  Blood,  and  retards 
its  Motion  in  fo  much  that  it  congeals,  and  fo  gives  rife  to 
the  Scurvy.  But  with  the  leave  of  [238]  the  good  Doctors, 
I'll  take  the  liberty  to  Vindicate  the  Air  of  this  agreeable 
City,  and  beg  'em  to  confider  that  the  impreffions  of  the  Air 
upon  the  Mafs  of  Blood  are  lefs  forcible  than  thofe  of  the 
Aliment.  If  the  Scurvy  took  its  rife  from  the  unfavourable 
Qualities  of  the  Air;  by  confequence  every  body  would  be 
equally  liable  to  it ;  but  this  we  find  to  be  falfe,  for  that  three 
quarters  of  the  Danijli  Nation  are  clear  of  that  Diftemper. 
The  Argument  I  now  offer  is  grounded  on  the  Obfervations 
I  made  upon  all  the  Soldiers  that  dy'd  of  that  Difeafe  at  the 
Forts  of  Frontenac  and  Niagara  in  the  year  1687  (which  I 
imparted  to  you  in  my  *  Letters  Dated  the  *  See  Letters  in 
next  year.)  In  thofe  Forts  we  have  the  the  firft  Volume, 
pureft  and  wholfomeft  Air  in  the  World  ;  dated  in  1688. 
and  for  that  reafon  it  ftands  more  to  reafon  to  attribute  the 
Invafion  of  the  Scurvy  (which  then  reign'd)  to  the  nature  of 
the  Aliment ;  I  mean,  to  the  Salt  Meat,  Butter  and  Cheefe, 
as  well  as  to  immoderate  Sleep  and  want  of  Exercife.  This 
account  of  the  matter  will  be  back'd  by  all  who  have  made 
long  Voyages,  when  they  confider  the  terrible  havock  that  the 
Scurvy  makes  upon  the  Ship's  Crews.  I  conclude  therefore 
that  the  frequency  of  the  Scurvy  is  owing  to  bad  Victuals,  pur- 


678  Some  New  Voyages 

fuant  to  the  Opinion  of  a  very  fenfible  Gentleman  whom  I 
credit  very  much.  This  Gentleman  reprefented  one  day,  that 
fuch  acid  Food  increafes  the  acidity  of  the  Blood ;  and  fo  it 
comes  to  pafs  that  the  Blood  of  Scorbutick  Perfons  is  defti- 
tute  of  Spirits ;  or  at  leaft,  its  Spirits  are  fo  thin  and  fcanty 
that  they  are  eafily  abforbed  and  invelop'd  by  the  prevailing 
acids,  and  by  that  means  put  under  an  impoffibility  of  excit- 
ing Fermentations.  As  for  the  influence  of  immoderate 
Sleep  and  [239]  long  Reft,  all  the  World  knows  that  they 
have  a  great  tendency  to  the  obftruction  of  the  Inteftines,  and 
promote  the  Generation  of  Crude  Juices,  in  cramping  the 
Senfible  and  wonted  Evacuations,  partly  by  the  flower  Mo- 
tion of  the  Spirits,  and  partly  by  the  Infenfible  Tranfpiration 
of  the  Sublimer  Particles.  From  thefe  Remarks  I  conclude, 
that  frefh  Meat,  good  Porridge,  regular  Sleep,  and  moderate 
Exercife  (ad  ruborem  non  ad  fudoretn)  are  Antidotes  againft 
the  Scurvy,  and  the  beft  Correctives  of  the  Mafs  of  Blood, 
whether  by  Sea  or  Land. 

If  this  digreflion,  Sir,  feems  too  long ;  I  would  have  you 
to  impute  it  to  my  earned  defire,  of  directing  you  how  to 
ward  off  that  ugly  Diftemper,  when  you  come  to  undertake 
any  long  Voyage.  I  would  not  have  you  think  that  I  have  thus 
interrupted  the  thread  of  my  Difcourfe,  with  intent  to  prove 
that  the  Air  of  this  Ifland  is  better  than  that  of  Portugal: 
That's  a  thing  I  know  nothing  of;  for  whatever  Air  I  breath 
in,  I  am  ftill  equally  well.  'Tis  true,  the  inconftancy  of  the 
Weather  might  affecl:  me  in  fome  meafure,  if  I  were  oblig'd 
to  pafs  the  remainder  of  my  life  in  Copenhagen  ;  for  here  we 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  679 

have  frequent  instances  of  the  Weather's  changing  three  or 
four  times  a  day,  and  ftiifting  from  cold  to  hot,  from  dry  to 
wet,  and  from  clear  to  cloudy. 

I  had  the  honour  to  pay  my  profound  refpecls  to  the  King 
of  Denmark  at  his  Caftle  of  Fredericksbourg,  upon  the  occafion 
of  his  Inftalling  fome  German  Princes  by  Proxy  in  the  Order 
of  the  Elephant.  That  Ceremony  which  indeed  was  very 
pretty,  drew  thither  a  great  confluence  of  perfons  of  a  diftin- 
guifhing  Character ;  particularly  all  the  Foreign  Minifters  who 
were  proud  of  aflifting  at  the  Solemnity.  Some  days  after 
that  Prince  went  to  take  the  Air  at  Cronengbourg,  [240]  which 
Hands  directly  upon  the  fide  of  the  ftreight  call'd  the  Sund. 
This  Caftle  has  a  regular  Fortification,  being  Wall'd  with 
Brick,  and  cover'd  with  a  great  number  of  wide  bore'd  and 
long  Culverines,  which  command  the  entry  of  the  Streight, 
that  I  take  to  be  the  breadth  of  Three  thoufand  five  hundred 
Geometrical  Paces,  that  is  to  fay,  a  large  French  League. 
Here  you  have  the  pleafure  of  Seeing  an  infinity  of  Foreign 
Ships  pafs  to  and  again  between  the  Ocean  and  the  Baltick- 
Sea  :  And  in  regard  that  the  Guns  of  Cronengbourg  are  the 
Keys  of  this  Port,  all  Foreign  Ships  lye  under  an  indifpen- 
fable  neceflity  of  coming  to  an  Anchor  at  Elfenor,  to  pay 
the  Toll  before  they  go  farther.  You  may  allege,  perhaps, 
that  a  Numerous  Fleet  of  Men  of  War  might  force  their 
Paffage  at  the  expence  of  a  little  Cannonading :  and  indeed 
I  own  the  allegation  to  be  juft ;  but  if  the  King  of  Denmark's 
Navy  were  at  Anchor  in  the  Streight,  I  am  perfwaded  they 
would  be  able  to  fecure  the  Pafs :   and  for  that  reafon  you 


680  Some  New  Voyages 

ought  not  to  think  it  ftrange  that  his  Danijh  Majefty  exacts  a 
moderate  Toll  from  the  Merchantmen  of  all  Nations,  except 
the  Swedes :  At  leaft  I  think  he  has  a  better  Title  to  demand 
it,  than  the  Grandfignior  has  in  the  Dardanelles.  For  moft  of 
the  Ships  that  fail  to  the  Baltick,  go  to  Trade  with  Lubeck, 
Brandenbourg,  Dantzick,  Pruffia,  Courland,  Livonia  and  Sweden; 
whereas  thofe  which  pafs  the  Dardanelles  are  bound  for  the 
Grandfignior' s  Ports,  and  Trade  with  none  but  his  own  Sub- 
jects. I  would  fain  know  whether  the  King  of  Spain  would 
not  make  the  like  pretenfions  to  a  Toll  upon  the  Streight  of 
Gibraltar,  if  fo  be  that  Europe  and  Africa  were  fo  friendly  as 
to  fit  a  little  nearer  together.  Nay,  put  the  impoflible  fup- 
pofition  out  of  the  cafe,  who  knows  but  that  Prince  may  make 
fuch  a  [241]  demand,  when  he  comes  to  have  a  Puiffant  Naval 
Force?  This  Queftion  is  not  fo  Problematick  as  you  think 
for.  However,  a  great  many  people  are  of  the  opinion  that 
they  might  eafily  avoid  the  Toll  of  the  Sund,  if  they  did  but 
fteer  obftinately  through  one  of  the  two  Belts :  But  they  are 
miftaken.  'Tis  true  indeed,  the  thing  might  take,  if  the 
Sands  in  the  Sea  were  as  fixt  as  they  are  in  the  Charts ;  but 
that  they  are  not ;  for  the  former  fhift  in  every  Storm,  whereas 
the  latter  ftand  for  ever  in  the  fame  Paper-ftation.  Befides 
there's  an  infinity  of  cover'd  Rocks,  and  irregular  Currents, 

unknown  to  the  experteft  Pilots,  notwith- 
*  Books  of  Hydro-  ftanding  the  afliftance  of  their  Maps  and 
graphical  Charts. 

*  bea-L  harts. 

To  call  up  another  Subject ;  Suffer  me  to  acquaint  you 
that  Denmark  produces  a  great  many  Commodities  which  are 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  68 1 

fold  with  great  Advantage  to  the  Englifli  and  Dutch ;  partic- 
ularly Rye,  Corn,  Cyder,  Mead,  Apples,  Oxen,  Cows,  Fat  Hogs, 
Horfes,  Iron,  Copper,  and  all  forts  of  Timber,  efpecially  Mails 
from  Norway,  which  affords  fome  of  one  piece  that  are  big 
enough  for  Noah's  Ark.  In  Norway  there  are  fome  Silver 
Mines,  which,  'tis  faid,  the  King  might  get  by,  if  he  would 
be  at  the  charge  of  Digging.  The  Norwegians  fell  likewife 
the  Skins  of  Bears,  Foxes,  Martins,  Otters  and  Elks;  but  they 
are  not  fo  fine  as  thofe  of  Canada. 

To  come  to  the  King  of  Denmark's  Naval  Force  ;  his  Fleet 
which  is  always  kept  in  good  order,  as  well  as  his  Magazines 
and  Arfenals,  confifts  of  Twenty  Eight  Ships  in  the  Line 
of  Battle,  Twenty  Six  Fregats  and  Four  or  Five  Firefhips ; 

particularly 

8  Ships  from  80  to  100  Guns. 

10  Ships  from  60  to  80  Guns. 

10  Ships  from  50  to  60  Guns. 

[242]  16  Fregats  from  10  to  26  Guns. 
3  Bomb  Veffels. 
He  maintains  1800  Carpenters  and  400  Gunners.  The 
Sea  Captains  Pay  is  not  always  the  fame.  Some  have  Three 
Hundred,  fome  Four  Hundred  Crowns  a  Year.  The  Captain 
Commodores  have  five  hundred,  and  the  Commodores  fix 
hundred :  Befides  thefe,  there  are  twelve  Marine  Volunteers, 
call'd  Apprentices,  who  have  a  hundred  Crowns  a  Year.  But 
after  all,  you'll  be  pleas'd  to  confider  that  thefe  Allowances 
are  not  fo  forry  as  you  may  think  for  ;  for  in  Denmark  a  Man 
may  live  for  thirty  Crowns,  better  than  for  a  hundred  Crowns 
in  France. 


682  Some  New  Voyages 

Befides  the  above  mention'd  Fleet,  his  Majefty  may,  upon 
occafion,  call  for  twenty  four  Ships  from  40  to  60  Guns, 
which  his  Subjects  are  oblig'd  to  fit  out  at  his  Pleafure,  and 
which  are  otherwife  imploy'd  in  Trading  to  Portugal,  Spain, 
and  the  Mediterranean.  'Tis  to  be  obferv'd  by  the  bye,  that 
a  Danifli  Ship  of  fifty  Guns  may  fafely  venture  a  Broad-Side 
with  a  French  or  Englifli  Ship  of  fixty,  by  reafon  that  their 
Timber  is  very  ftrong,  and  their  Guns  of  a  wide  Bore.  All 
the  Dani/h  Men  of  War  are  Built  with  half-flat  Ribs,  which 
occafions  their  heavy  Sailing.  Their  Mafts  are  very  thick  and 
fhort ;  Short  that  they  may  not  bend  under  the  Sails  when 
they  Weather  Capes,  Iflands,  Rocks  and  Banks  in  a  Storm ; 
and  thick  that  they  may  bear  the  Sails  tight,  in  doubling 
thefe  Capes,  Iflands,  &c.  when  the  Boifterous  Winds  furrow 
the  Surface  of  the  Baltick.  The  King  of  Denmark's  Sea  Men 
are  well  entertain'd,  and  well  pay'd,  and  have  twelve  Crowns 
Bounty-Mony  over  and  above  their  Wages,  as  foon  as  the 
Fleet  is  laid  up.  But  at  the  fame  time,  you  muft  know  that 
three  thoufand  Sea  Men  are  kept  in  conftant  Pay,  and  lodg'd  in 
[243]  an  uniform  Row  of  Barracks  in  the  Streets  of  this  City. 

I  fhall  conclude  this  Letter  with  a  View  of  the  Coin  and 
Current  Mony  of  the  Kingdom. 

A  Bank  Rix  Dollar  is  worth  50  Lubec  Pence. 

A  Danifli  Rix  Dollar  goes  for  48  Lubec  Pence. 

A  Shet  Dal  is  worth  32  Lubec  Sous. 

A  Marc-lubs  paffes  for  16  Stuivers  of  Lubec. 

A  Marc  Danifli  is  worth  8  Lubec  Stuivers. 

A  half  Mark  Danifli  is  worth  4  Lubec  Pence. 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  683 

One  Lubec  Penny  is  worth  two  Danifli  Pence,  and  two 
Danifli  Pence  are  of  the  fame  value  with  fourteen  French 
Deniers,  which  is  much  the  fame  with  an  Englipi  Penny ;  and 
by  this  Standard  you  may  reduce  all  the  above  mention'd 
Denominations. 

A  Gold  Ducat  is  worth  two  Danifli  Rix  Dollars  and  four- 
teen Pence  ;  fometimes  'tis  two  Pence  under  or  over.  A  Rofe- 
Noble  is  two  Ducats.  A  Silver  Lowis  or  a  French  Crown 
paffes  in  Denmark  for  a  Danijh  Rix  Dollar ;  and  the  half  and 
quarter  Crowns  obferve  the  fame  proportion,  as  well  as  the 
Louis  d'  Ores. 

In  the  Ifland  of  Zealand  the  Leagues  confift  of  4200  Geo- 
metrical Paces ;  the  Norway  Leagues  are  longer,  and  thofe  of 
Holftein  are  of  lefs  extent.  The  Copenhagen  Ell  is  an  Inch  and 
a  half  bigger  than  the  French  half  Ell. 

/  am, 

SIR, 

Tours,  &c. 


684  Some  New  Voyages 


[244]      LETTER    IV. 

Dated  at  Paris,  Dec.  29.  1694. 

Containing  a  Journal  of  the  Author's  Travels  from  Copenhagen 

to  Paris. 

SIR, 

I  LEFT  Copenhagen  three  days  after  the  Date  of  my  laft; 
being  accommodated  with  Mr.  de  Bonrepeau's  Coaches, 
who  to  avoid  the  fatigue  of  pafling  between  the  two  Belts,  had 
gone  before  to  Wait  upon  the  King  of  Denmark  at  Coldinck. 
You  muft  know,  that  Prince  goes  thither  Poft  every  Year,  not- 
withftanding  that  his  Retinue  amounts  to  a  thoufand  or  twelve 
hundred  Persons.  Upon  that  occafion,  the  Boors  of  the 
Villages  adjacent  to  the  Road,  are  oblig'd  to  bring  their 
Horfes  to  certain  Places  at  an  appointed  hour,  in  order  to 
draw  the  Coaches  and  Waggons  that  contain  that  numerous 
Retinue,  with  their  Baggage.  Tho'  thefe  Horfes  are  little, 
yet  they  are  ftrong,  vigorous,  tidy,  infenfible  of  cold,  and  fo 
very  light,  that  they'll  go  you  a  good  Trott  as  faft  as  a 
Gallop.  The  Stages  for  Ihifting  the  Horfes  are  two  or  three 
Leagues,  as  well  as  thofe  for  the  Horfe-Guards  which  conduct 
the  King  from  place  to  place,  and  are  reliev'd  every  Stage. 

We  fet  out  from  Copenhagen  Sept.  15.  and  after  three  hours 
Travelling,  arriv'd  at  Roskild,  which  makes  fix  of  thofe  Leagues 


to  Portugal  mid  Denmark.  685 

of  which  twenty  goe  to  a  degree.  We  pafs'd  fo  fpeedily  that 
we  had  only  time  to  view  the  Tombs  of  the  Kings  of  Denmark^ 
while  the  Boors  put  frefti  Horfes  in  the  [245]  Coaches. 
These  Marble  Maufoleums  are  a  finifh'd  piece  of  Architecture, 
and  adorn'd  with  Bajfe  Releivo's  and  Latin  Infcriptions.  The 
fine  Marble  of  which  they  are  Built,  is  very  well  Polifh'd, 
being  that  of  Paros,  and  Africa,  and  that  call'd  Brocatelle,  Ser- 
pentine and  Cipellino.  The  Tombs  are  plac'd  in  the  Chappel 
of  an  ancient  Church,  that  belong'd  to  the  Beneditlins  before 
Luther's  Remonftrances.  The  fame  very  day  we  came  to  take 
up  our  night's  Lodging  in  a  Village  near  the  great  Belt; 
having  enjoy'd  the  pleafure  of  viewing  by  the  way,  fome  ad- 
mirable Land-Skips.  Next  day  at  eight  a  Clock  in  the  Morn- 
ing, we  arriv'd  at  the  Town  of  Cortos,  which  ftands  upon  the 
Chops  of  the  above  mention'd  Streight ;  and  is  Fortified  with 
Earth. 

As  foon  as  we  Imbarqu'd  in  the  Yacht  that  lay  ready  for 
Mr.  de  Bonrepau,  we  fet  Sail ;  but  in  eroding  thefe  four 
Leagues  of  Sea,  the  Wind  was  fo  low  and  the  Sea  fo  calm, 
that  one  might  have  drank  Bumpers  upon  the  Deck  without 
fpilling.  We  no  fooner  landed  at  Nibourg,  a  little  paltry 
place  regularly  Fortified,  than  we  took  Coach,  and  fet  out  for 
Odenzee,  the  Capital  City  of  Fionia,  where  we  lay  that  Night. 
Odenzee  ftands  in  the  middle  of  that  Ifland,  which  is  one  of 
the  moft  fertile  Territories  of  Denmark.  The  Cathedral 
Church  is  as  handfome  as  'tis  large.  In  former  times  this 
City  was  the  Refidence  of  the  Kings  of  Denmark,  and  the 
Inhabitants  were  fo   Barbarous   as  to  murder  one  of  their 


686  Some  New  Voyages 

Princes.     The  Nobility  of  the  Ifland  vye  with  thofe  of  Venice 

for  Antiquity ;    efpecially  the  Family  of  Trool,  which  fignifies 

Sorcerer,  and  which  bears  a  Devil  Sable  upon  a  Field  Gules  for 

their  Arms  :    From  whence  I  conclude  that  this  Leo  Rugiens 

was  more  tradable   and  illuftrious  in  the 
*Jn  old  Dotard  that     primitive  j-      6]  ti  fchan  jn  thofe  of  the 

advances  a  tboufand 
idle  Whims,  which     *  Author  of  the  Seven  Trumpets,  or  elfe  the 

are  enough  to  turn  a     Ancient  Nobility  would  not  have  glory'd 

Woman's  Brains.         m  placing  him  in  their  Coats  of  Arms. 

The  i8/£  we  fet  out  for  Midelford,  where  we  found  a 
Barque  that  wafted  us  over  from  the  farther  fide  of  the  little 
Belt,  after  halting  two  or  three  hours  in  vain,  for  the  coming 
up  of  the  Waggons  with  Mr.  de  Bonrepaifs  Domefticks  and 
Provifions.  As  foon  as  we  crofs'd  over,  we  receiv'd  Advice 
that  they  had  mifs'd  their  way ;  but  we  were  fo  pinch'd  with 
Hunger  that  we  were  forc'd  to  go  to  a  Farmer's  Houfe,  and 
drefs  with  our  own  Hands  fome  Broil'd  Meat  and  Pan-Cakes, 
that  we  eat  without  drinking  ;  for  our  Landlords  Beer  was  as 
Wretched  as  his  Water.  Some  time  after  the  Ambaffadour's 
Equipage  Arriv'd ;  but  'twas  then  fo  very  late  that  we  were 
forc'd  to  tarry  all  night  in  that  Houfe  of  Martyrdom.  The 
next  day  we  arriv'd  at  Coldinck,  where  the  Magiftrate  took 
care  to  provide  Lodgings  for  the  Ambaffador  in  one  of  the 
beft  Houfes  in  Town.  Three  or  four  days  after,  the  King 
arriv'd  at  the  fame  place. 

This  little  Town  is  Seated  in  the  Country  of  Jutland,  upon 
the  Banks  of  a  mallow  Gulf  that  is  Navigable  only  by 
Barques :    But  at  the  fame  time,  'tis  very  confiderable  upon 


^3/. 


1  he  arms  of  t/ie  Outajctiiiit  ca/li:/ 


jT/?e  /innf  afthr  OiiteftiBoties  afi'ai 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  687 

the  account  of  the  Toll  for  Cattel  that's  pay'd  at  that  place, 
and  brings  into  the  Royal  Treafury  near  two  hundred  thou- 
fand  Rix  Dollars.  The  Caftle  is  an  ancient  Pile  of  Stone, 
that  contains  a  great  many  Rooms  :  But  'tis  Situated  to  great 
advantage,  for  it  ftands  on  an  Eminence  that  affords  you  a 
View  of  all  the  Country  round.  The  Danes  would  have  us 
believe  upon  their  Word,  [247]  that  an  Angel  was  fent  from 
Heaven  to  the  great  Hall  of  this  Caftle,  to  acquaint  Chriftian 
III.  King  of  Denmark,  that  God  was  ready  to  receive  him 
after  three  days.  They  add,  that  in  order  to  perpetuate  the 
Memory  of  this  miraculous  Vifion,  the  very  place  where  this 
Heavenly  Ambaffadour  had  Audience  of  the  Prince,  was  took 
notice  of,  and  a  great  Poft  was  fix'd  in  it,  which  I  faw  every 
time  I  went  to  Court ;  for  'twas  in  that  very  Hall  that  the 
King  made  his  publick  Appearance  all  the  time  he  was  at 
Coldinck. 

We  took  leave  of  Coldinck  on  the  24^,  and  Arriv'd  on  the 
i^th  at  Rensbourg,  after  pafling  by  feveral  little  Towns  and 
Royal  Seats,  the  Defcription  of  which  would  be  too  tedious. 
I  fhall  only  tell  you  by  the  bye,  we  have  a  great  deal  more 
pleafure  than  fatigue  in  Riding  Poft  in  this  Country,  whether 
in  Coach  or  Waggon,  by  reafon  of  the  evennefs  of  the  Ground, 
which  affords  as  few  Stones  as  Mountains.  As  foon  as  the 
King  Arriv'd  at  Rensbourg,  he  review'd  the  Fortifications  of 
the  Place,  which  may  eafily  be  made  one  of  the  beft  Forts  in 
Europe.  Then  he  review'd  a  Body  of  Foot  and  Horfe,  and 
had  a  great  deal  of  reafon  to  be  fatisfied  with  their  appear- 
ance.    After  fome  days  he  fet  out  for  Glucftat,  a  little  Town 


688  Some  New  Voyages 

upon  the  Elbe  ;  almoft  as  regularly  Fortified  as  the  laft  I  fpoke 
of.  In  the  mean  time  Mr.  de  Bonrepau,  who  could  not  follow 
that  Monarch,  by  reafon  of  fome  Bufinefs  he  had  to  adjuft 
with  the  Abbot  Bidal  at  Renfbourg,  gave  me  recommendatory 
Letters  to  feveral  Perfons,  who  he  thought  would  be  able  to 
influence  Mr.  de  Ponchartrain  :  But  he  was  miftaken  in  his 
Conjeclure,  as  you'll  fee  prefently. 

After  taking  leave  of  the  Ambaffadour,  I  went  to  Hamburg, 
where  I  was  inform'd  that  Count  Caniffec,  the  Emperor's 
Envoy  extraordinary  to  [248]  the  Court  of  Denmark,  follicited 
the  Burgomafters  to  Arreft  me.  The  Surmife  feem'd  to  be 
not  improbable,  for  I  knew  that  fome  time  before  he  had 
taken  up  a  Prejudice  againft  me  at  Frederhjbourg,  upon  the 
account  of  fome  Illuminations  that  were  made  in  that  place ; 
which  oblig'd  me  to  flie  with  all  expedition  to  Altena,  and 
tarry  there  for  a  Paffport  from  the  Duke  of  Bavaria,  without 
which  I  had  certainly  been  taken  up  in  the  Spanijh  Flanders.1 
I  had  no  fooner  receiv'd  this  intelligence,  than  I  met  with  the 
favourable  opportunity  of  a  return  Coach  bound  for  Amflerdam, 
where  I  found  a  place  at  an  eafy  rate,  without  being  incom- 
moded with  a  Croud  of  Paffengers,  for  there  was  but  four 
of  us,  viz.  An  old  Englijh  Merchant,  a  German  Lady  with 
her  Chamber-Maid,  and  I.  The  Journey  lafted  eight  days, 
and  would  have  feem'd  eight  courfes  of  Eternity  to  me,  if  it 
had  not  been  for  the  agreeable  Converfation  of  that  lovely 
Lady,  who  fpoke  fuch  good  French,  as  to  exprefs  her  felf 


1  Maximilien  II  was  Duke  of  Bavaria  (1679-1726) .     A  firm  ally  of  the  Spanish 
monarch,  his  passport  would  secure  a  traveller  in  the  realms  of  that  ruler.  —  Ed. 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  689 

very  handfomely.  You  muft  confider,  Sir,  that  the  Ways  of 
Arabia  Deferta  are  not  fo  bad  as  the  Roads  of  Weftphalia  ; 
at  leaft  'tis  certain  they  are  not  fo  dirty.  But  the  chief  incon- 
veniency  lies  in  the  Inns  ;  for  you  muft  know,  all  the  publick 
Houfes  upon  the  Road  are  downright  Hofpitals ;  the  Land- 
lords of  which  would  Starve  for  hunger,  if  Foreigners  had 
not  the  Charity  to  give  'em  a  Share  of  their  Provifions,  which 
they  are  forc'd  to  gather  in  from  the  Rich  Farmers  that  live 
at  a  diftance  one  from  another.  In  thefe  wretched  Retreats 
you  muft  reft  fatisfied  in  lying  upon  Straw ;  and  all  the  Com- 
fort a  poor  Traveller  has,  confifts  in  this,  that  he  may  com- 
mand his  Landlord  and  Landlady,  and  their  Children,  to  go 
and  run  where  he  pleafes.  If  you  find  a  Frying-Pan  and  a 
Kettle  to  drefs  your  Meat  withal,  you're  a  happy  [249]  Man. 
Wood  indeed  there's  good  Store  of;  and  their  Chimneys 
being  Built  fquare,  and  ftanding  by  themfelves,  a  hundred 
Perfons  may  fit  and  Warm  themfelves  at  the  Fire. 

In  the  mean  time,  I  admir'd  the  Patience  of  the  German 
Lady,  who  was  fo  far  from  complaining  of  the  Hardships  of 
the  Journy,  that  fhe  took  pleafure  in  rallying  upon  the  En- 
glijh  Merchant,  her  Maid  and  my  felf,  who  were  all  mightily 
out  of  humour.  I  conjectur'd  from  her  air  and  carriage,  that 
fhe  was  a  Perfon  of  Quality ;  and  I  found  afterwards  I  was  not 
miftaken,  for  fince  we  parted,  I  heard  fhe  was  a  Countefs  of 
the  Empire.  She  was  fo  well  acquainted  with  the  French 
humours,  that  I  did  not  doubt  but  that  fhe  had  been  at  Paris: 
But  the  thing  that  confirrn'd   me  in  that  Opinion,  was  her 

talking  fo  accurately  of  the  Perfons  of  the  firft  Quality  about 

44 


690  Some  New  Voyages 

Court ;  not  to  mention  that  fhe  had  an  old  French  Servant,  a 
Roman  Catbolick,  that  could  fcarce  fpeak  a  Word  of  High  Dutch. 
The  Lady  was  of  a  large  Stature  and  well  Made;  me  look'd 
brisk  enough,  and  her  Beauty  was  fo  affecting  that  fhe  us'd  all 
her  efforts  in  vain,  to  make  me  believe  fhe  was  five  and  fifty 
years  of  Age.     She  could  not  endure  to  be  anfwer'd,  that  her 
frem  and  lively  Complexion  gave  the  lie  to  her  Arithmetick ; 
this  me  took  for  an  affront,  alledging  that  the  Charms  of  a 
Woman  beyond  fifty,  are  too  much  Shrivel'd  to  caufe  Admira- 
tion.    This,  I  take  it,  is  a  very  fingular  and  uncommon  thing, - 
for  the  reft  of  her  Sex  are  fcarce  accuftom'd  to  that  fort  of 
Language,  in  regard  that   they'd  rather  their  Vertue  were 
attack'd  than  their  Beauty :  But  whatever  be  in  that  matter, 
fhe  feem'd  to  be  mightily  prepoffefs'd  againft  the  French,  in 
branding  'em  for  a  light,  giddy  brain'd,  indifcreet  People, 
and  ftill  reflecting  upon  'em  for  [250]  thinking  meanly  of  the 
Germans.     "  How  comes  it  to  pafs,  faid  fhe,  that  the  French 
'  have  the  impudence  to  deny  the  Germans  the  Character  of 
1  Witty,  and  to  take  'em  for  a  grofs  heavy  People ;  inftead  of 
'  acknowledging  their  juft  Title  to  folid  Senfe  and  Reflection, 
'  by  vertue  of  which  they  dive  judicioufly  to  the  bottom  of 
1  things?     What  is  it,  continued  fhe,  that  the  French  require 
1  as  effential  to  the  Character  of  avoir  de  Vefprit?      Muft  we 
'  value  our  felves  upon  a  livelynefs,  and  a  falfe  fparkling  Wit 
'that  dazzles  with  a  vain  Splendor?     Muft   we  mak't  our 
1  bufinefs  to  procure  a  ready  and  fubtle  imagination,  in  order 
'  to  drefs  idle  Flams  in  Gilded  Words?     No,  no  ;  that  nicety 
'  of  expreflion  is  but  Whip'd  Cream  :  And  to  fpeak  the  juf- 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  691 

"  tice  of  the  matter,  we  ought  to  allow  the  French  a  preferable 
"  Title  to  the  Science  of  fpeaking  well,  and  to  the  Germans  a 
"  juft  claim  of  going  beyond  'em  in  juft  thoughts.  But  this 
was  not  all :  For  me  attack'd  the  French  Pride  fo  vigoroufly, 
that  fhe  made  Prefumption  and  Vanity  their  ordinary  and 
leffer  Crimes.  This  fhews,  me  had  been  in  France ;  to  which 
for  a  farther  proof  fhe  added,  that  the  French  infulted  the 
Germans  with  thefe  ridiculous  Proverbs ;  viz.  This  Fellow's  as 
foolifh  as  a  German ;  He  picked  a  German  Quarrel  with  me;  he 
takes  me  for  a  German.  Such  a  Woman  would  make  a  good  Ger- 
man Woman,  i.  e.  She  is  fimple  and  foolifh.  At  the  fame  time, 
I  endeavour'd  to  diffuade  her  from  fuch  unfavourable  thoughts, 
by  remonftrating  that  fhe  ought  to  make  a  wide  diftinction 
between  the  fenfible  People  of  France,  and  thofe  who  are  fuch 
fools  as  to  imagine  themfelves  a  Standard  for  all  other  Na- 
tions. I  intreated  her  to  throw  off  her  prejudicate  Apprehen- 
fions,  and  to  believe  that  the  knowing  part  of  our  World  have 
a  profound  [251]  efteem  for  the  Germans,  and  cry  up  their 
Merit,  their  Probity,  their  ftrong  Senfe,  and  their  inviolable 
Fidelity.  In  earneft,  Sir,  the  Perfons  of  any  Note  in  Germany, 
have  a  juft  Title  to  all  thefe  good  qualities ;  nay,  the  Ety- 
mology of  the  Word,  (Alleman,  i.  e.  a  German)  gives  us  fome 
light  as  to  their  Character:  For  All  and  Man  imports  that 
they  are  a  People  capable  of  any  thing,  like  the  Jefuits  to  whom 
fome  give  the  Title  of  Jefuifta  Omnis  Homo,  and  who  are  there- 
fore faid  to  be  Germans,  by  a  Sophiftical  way  of  Punning.  But 
this  is  not  all  that  may  be  offer'd  on  their  behalf;  there  are  a 
thoufand  things  that  fpeak  the  Merit  of  the  Germans.     We 


692  Some  New  Voyages 

are  indebted  to  'em  for  the  difcovery  of  the  property  of  the 
Load-Stone,  without  which  the  New  World  had  never  reach'd 
our  knowledg  ;  for  the  Invention  of  Printing,  which  has  taught 
us  to  diftinguifh  Fabulous  Manufcripts  from  Divine  Writings; 
for  the  Invention  of  Clocks,  of  the  Cafting  of  Guns,  Bells,  &c. 
This  gives  plain  evidence  of  their  diftinguifhing  Induftry  and 
Capacity.  Add  to  all  this  that  Germany  has  produc'd  Soldiers, 
who  by  their  Valour  and  Bravery  made  the  Capitol  to  tremble, 
after  defeating  the  Roman  Confuls,  and  ftanding  the  Brunts  of 
all  the  Courage  and  Puiffance  of  the  Roman  Legions ;  That  it 
has  been  equally  fertile  in  great  Men,  in  the  way  of  Learning, 
particularly  Jujlus  Lipfius,  Furftemberg,  Mr.  Spanheim,  and  Me- 
lantlhon}  All  this  I  reprefented  to  the  Lady ;  but  when  I 
mention'd  Melanblhon,  me  interrupted  me,  and  faid,  fhe  was 
furpris'd  to  find  that  the  French  twitted  the  Germans  with  the 
Vice  of  hard  Drinking,  fince  themfelves  ftood  chargeable  with 
Plato's  Crime.  I  had  almoft  made  anfwer,  that  if  the  French 
had  the  fame  relifh  of  things  with  that  Philofopher,  their  only 
view  was  to  love  Superannuated  Ladies  with  as  much  Paflion 
[252]  as  he  did  his  old  Archeanaffa  :  But  I  contented  my  felf 
in  replying,  that  the  Germans  being  difoblig'd  by  having  the 
Character  of  Hard  Drinkers  thrown  upon  'em,  made  their  re- 
prifals  upon  the  French,  by  fattening  upon  them  the  imputation 


1  A  group  of  German  savants,  of  whom  Justus  Lipsius  (1547-1606)  was  a  great 
authority  upon  Roman  antiquities  ;  the  Prince  von  Furstemberg  (1625-82)  was  arch- 
bishop of  Strassburg,  and  a  satellite  of  Louis  XIV  ;  Ezekiel  Spanheim  (1629-1710) 
was  a  Latin  scholar,  author  of  a  History  of  the  Casars,  and  a  diplomat  of  the  court 
of  the  Elector  of  Brandenburg  ;  Melancthon  (1497-1560),  the  friend  of  Luther,  was 
the  principal  scholar  of  the  Reformation.  — Ed. 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  693 

of  Hanetonk  Love  (Sodomy)  with  intent  to  render  'em  odious 
to  the  fair  Sex.  I  had  no  occafion  to  make  any  farther  offers  in 
juftification  of  the  French,  for  the  Lady  feem'd  to  be  fatisfied 
with  what  I  faid.  In  fine,  this  Lady  was  fo  comely  and  agree- 
able in  fuch  advanc'd  Years,  that  if  Balzac  had  feen  her,  he 
would  not  have  offer'd  to  fay  that  he  never  faw  a  handfome 
old  Woman  in  his  life-time.1  Queftionlefs,  that  Gafcogne  Oracle 
underftood,  by  an  old  Woman,  one  of  Seventy  years  of  Age  ; 
for  I  have  feen  three  or  four  that  were  perfect  Beauties  at 
Sixty,  without  ever  a  Wrinkle  on  their  Faces,  or  a  grey  Hair 
on  their  Heads ;  and  whofe  Eyes  made  ftill  a  retreat  for 
Cupid. 

As  foon  as  I  arriv'd  at  Amftcrdam,  I  hir'd  the  Roof  of  the 
Night-Boat  for  Rotterdam  ;  which  fets  out  every  day  at  three  a 
Clock  at  both  places,  in  order  to  convey  Paffengers  to  and 
again  between  thefe  two  Cities.  It  coft  me  a  Crown,  which  I 
did  not  grudge ;  for  I  had  the  conveniency  of  Sleeping  very 
quietly  all  Night  upon  the  Quilts  that  the  Waterman  is 
oblig'd  to  furnifh  to  all  Paffengers,  who  take  the  Stern-Room, 
call'd  the  Roof.  The  next  day  after  my  Arrival  at  Rotterdam, 
I  took  Shipping  for  Antwerp  on  Board  of  a  Hoy,  which  is  a 
Veflel  with  flat  Ribs,  and  Lee-boards  or  Wings.  The  paffage 
from  Rotterdam  to  Antwerp  is  both  fafe  and  eafy,  and  runs 
between  the  Terra  Firma  and  the  Dutch  Iflands  ;  being  favour'd 
by  the  Tydes.     From  Antwerp  to  Bruffels  I  made  ufe  of  the 


1  Lahontan  here  refers  to  the  litterateur  Jean  Louis  Guez  de  Balzac  (1597-1654) , 
whose  Letters  and  Dissertations  did  much  to  fix  the  forms  of  French  prose.  On  his 
father's  side  he  also  was  a  Gascon,  being  descended  from  a  good  family  of  Langue- 
doc.  —  En. 


694  Some  New  Voyages 

common  Paffage-Boat,  which  is  only  a  great  Boat  drawn  by  a 
Horfe.  At  Bruffels  I  was  advis'd  to  Ride  Poft  [253]  to  Lijle ; 
becaufe  the  High-way-men  us'd  to  Rob  moft  of  the  Coaches 
and  Waggons  upon  that  Road.  I  comply'd  with  the  Seafon- 
ably  Advice,  and  am  now  convinc'd  that  if  I  had  not  done  fo 
I  had  certainly  been  Rob'd.  Two  days  after  my  arrival  at 
Lijle,  I  took  a  place  in  the  Coach  which  goes  twice  a  Week  to 
this  good  City  of  Paris;  and  arriv'd  here  laft  Week,  after 
being  fufficiently  Fleec'd  by  the  Mercylefs  Inn-Keepers  upon 
the  Road.  Thefe  impofmg  Dogs  give  as  little  quarter  to  a 
Traveller,  that  do's  not  bargain  before  hand  for  what  he  eats; 
as  the  Waiters  of  Peronne  do  to  thofe  who  indeavour  to  run 
Goods.  At  Peronne,  you  muft  know,  they  fearch  fo  narrowly, 
that  they  not  only  turn  every  thing  out  of  a  Cheft  or  a  Port- 
manteau, but  examine  every  body  from  top  to  toe.  They 
fufpect  your  Big-Belly'd  Women  moft ;  and  examine  'em  fo 
narrowly,  that  fometimes  they  Aide  their  Hand  into  a  place 
that  was  appointed  for  fomewhat  elfe.  If  any  Traveller  has 
either  Snufh,  Tea,  Indian  Stuffs  or  Dutch  Books  among  his 
Baggage,  the  whole  Cargo  is  Confiscated. 

Immediately  upon  my  Arrival  in  this  place,  I  repair'd  to 
Verfailles  to  deliver  Mr.  de  Bonrepau's  Letters :  But  the  Per- 
fons  to  whom  they  were  addrefs'd,  us'd  their  utmoft  Efforts 
to  no  purpofe,  in  folliciting  Mr.  de  Ponchartrain  to  allow  me  to 
juftify  my  Conduct  at  Placentia.  He  anfwer'd  'em  very  coldly, 
that  his  Majefty's  ftiff  and  inflexible  Temper  would  never 
admit  of  any  Juftification  from  an  Inferiour  in  oppofition  to 
his  Superiour.     This  anfwer,  which  in  fome  meafure  tarnifhes 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  695 

the  Shining  Merit  and  Judicious  Conduct  of  fo  Wife  a  Prince  ; 
gave  me  to  know  that  the  Severity  of  Mr.  de  Ponchartrain  did 
not  proceed  fo  much  from  a  Principle  of  Equity,  as  from  a 
Stiff  Iroquefe  Temper.  In  the  mean  time  I  [254]  was  like  to 
die  for  Grief,  nothwithftanding  that  all  my  Friends  endeav- 
our'd  to  folace  me,  in  advifing  me  to  raife  my  Mind  above  the 
Shocks  of  bad  Fortune,  till  a  change  of  Government  hap- 
pen'd.  They  did  not  fcruple  to  counfel  me  to  look  out  for 
fome  Refuge,  where  I  might  be  fhelter'd  from  the  Fury  of 
that  Minifter,  fo  long  as  it  pleafes  God  to  vouchfafe  him  the 
benefit  of  life,  in  order  to  allow  him  time  to  be  Converted.  / 
delight  not  in  the  death  of  a  Sinner,  but  would  have  him  to  be 
Converted,  &c.  This  Paffage  affords  a  fine  Speculation,  but 
I  muft  own  it  has  but  little  influence  on  one  who  is  oblig'd  to 
wait  fo  long  without  any  other  relief  than  the  Treafure  at  the 
bottom  of  Pandora's  Box.  Adieu,  Sir ;  I  am  to  fet  out  im- 
mediately for  my  Province,  where  I  mall  only  pafs  thro'  like 
Lightning.  Not  to  trouble  you  with  what's  behind,  I  con- 
clude with  my  plain  Compliment,  that 

I  am, 

SIR, 

Yours,  &c. 


696  Some  New  Voyages 


[255]      LETTER  V. 

*  K^Lahontan  in      Dated  ^  *  ^^  y^  ^  lg 
Bajje  Navarre. 

Giving  a  View  of  the  Superftition  and  Ignorance  of  the  People  of 
Beam  ;  their  addiclednefs  to  the  Notions  of  Witchcraft,  Appari- 
tions, &c.    And  the  Author's  Arguments  againft  that  Delufwn. 

SIR, 

DOUBTLESS  you'l  be  mightily  furpriz'd  when  you  hear  I 
am  now  in  fight  of  a  Country  of  which  I  retain  no  more 
than  the  bare  Name ;  but  your  furprizal  will  be  yet  greater 
when  you're  inform'd  that  all  the  recommendations  of  Perfons 
of  the  firft  Quality  about  Court  could  not  influence  Mr.  de 
Ponchartrain,  whofe  PrepofferTion  againft  me  is  invincible.  I 
left  Paris  with  a  melancholy  Mind,  and  went  to  Solace  my  felf 
for  fome  Months  in  a  certain  Province  of  the  Kingdom  that 
you  will  eafily  guefs  at.  From  thence  I  made  a  trip  ftreight 
to  Rochel,  where  I  went  on  board  of  a  Veffel  that  commonly 
carries  Paffengers  to  Tremblade.  In  that  Paffage  I  fell  into 
the  Company  of  a  White  Friar,  the  Hiftory  of  whom  is  fo 
very  uncommon  that  I  can't  pafs  him  in  filence. 

He  calls  himfelf  Don  Carlos  Baltafar  de  Mendoza,  and  is 
the  Son  of  a  rich  Gentleman  at  Bruffels.  He  is  about  three 
and  thirty  or  four  and  thirty  Years  of  Age,  and  is  at  leaft  as 
tall  and  as  meagre  as  I  am.     He  ferv'd  the  King  of  Spain 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  697 

three  or  four  Years  in  the  quality  of  a  Captain  of  [256] 
Horfe  ;  and  for  as  much  as  he  ftudy'd  the  purfuit  of  Sciences, 
more  than  the  humouring  of  the  Governour  of  the  Nether- 
lands, his  Catholick  Majefty  refus'd  him  a  Regiment  that  his 
Father  offer'd  to  raife  at  his  own  Charge.  This  denial 
oblig'd  him  to  quit  the  Service  :  and  foon  after,  being  prefs'd 
by  his  Parents  to  Marry,  he  went  to  Germany  and  put  on  a 
Monks  Habit,  which  he  threw  away  fome  time  after.  Thofe 
who  gave  me  an  account  of  him,  affur'd  me  that  he  had  taken 
up  and  laid  down  the  Habit  feveral  times.  But  whatever  be 
in  that  matter,  he  is  certainly  one  of  the  moft  Accomplifh'd 
Men  of  this  Age.  He  is  at  once  perfectly  well  acquainted 
with  the  fineft  Sciences,  and  with  the  principal  Languages  of 
Europe.  This  Character  was  given  him  by  the  greateft  Men 
in  Bourdeaux,  who  pay'd  him  feveral  Vifits  that  I  was  witnefs 
to,  for  we  lodg'd  together  in  that  City.  But  the  beft  of  the 
Story  is,  that  the  next  Day  after  our  arrival  two  Merchants 
of  his  own  Country  paid  him  a  round  fum  of  dry  Louifd'ors, 
part  of  which  he  beftow'd  upon  the  Soldiers  in  the  Trompet- 
Caftle,  who  would  otherwife  never  have  thought  that  an  Eccle- 
fiaftick  would  be  fo  Liberal  to  Perfons  of  a  Military  Capacity. 
All  the  Divines,  Mathematicians  and  Philofophers  that  vifited 
him,  were  fo  charm'd  with  the  extent  of  his  Knowledge,  that 
they  affirm'd  that  the  quickeft  and  fharpeft  Man  in  the  World 
could  not  acquire  an  equal  flock  of  Learning  in  a  courfe  of 
fixty  Years  Study.  We  ftaid  fifteen  Days  at  Bourdeaux,  and 
during  that  time  he  had  the  Curiofity  to  fee  nothing  but  a 
little  Church  in  the  Neighbourhood  of  his  Lodgings,  and  the 


698  Some  New  Voyages 

Trompet-Caftle.  He  Read  and  Wrote  inceffantly ;  and  as 
for  the  Breviary  I  believe  he  had  none  about  him,  for  he  was 
neither  Deacon  nor  Prieft.  I  never  could  [257]  learn  what 
Order  he  was  of;  for  when  I  ask'd  him,  his  Anfwer  was,  /  am 
a  White  Monk,  and  nothing  more. 

Both  of  us  took  Places  in  the  Bayonne  Coach  (for  the  Friar 
was  bound  for  Spain;)  when  we  came  to  Efperon  we  parted, 
and  I  took  the  Dax  and  Bayonne  Road.  I  had  no  fooner 
arrived  at  the  Country  Houfe  where  I  now  am,  than  I  receiv'd 
an  infinity  of  Vifits  that  I  could  eafily  have  difpens'd  with; 
for  within  thefe  four  Days  they  have  fo  fill'd  my  Head  with 
Stories  of  Gardening,  dreffing  of  Vines,  Hunting  and  Fifhing, 
that  I  have  fcarce  a  fufficient  freedom  of  thought  to  difpatch 
this  Exprefs,  and  to  acquaint  you  with  the  Affairs  that  oblige 
me  to  defire  an  Interview  with  you.  But  that  which  troubled 
me  moft,  was  the  impertinent  Folly  of  our  wifer  fort  of  Coun- 
try-men :  For  all  of  'em,  whether  Priefts,  Gentlemen  or  Peaf- 
ants,  do  nothing  but  teaze  me  from  Morning  to  Night  with 
Stories  of  Wizards  and  Witches ;  and  Inftance  particularly  in 
you,  as  being  the  only  Man  in  the  World  that  has  fuftain'd 
moft  harm  from  that  fort  of  Cattle ;  in  fine,  they  ply  me  fo 
hot  with  their  Chimera's,  that  I'm  affrai'd  I  fhall  turn  Magi- 
cian. The  whimfical  Souls  affure  me  in  good  earneft,  that 
fuch  and  fuch  a  one  is  a  Wizard ;  nay,  fome  fwear  the  fame 
thing  of  themfelves,  and  others  declare  in  Confcience  that  they 
once  were  of  that  Society,  but  had  afterwards  quited  the 
Devils  Sabbath.  I  ask'd  feveral  of  'em  the  Charms  of  that 
Sabbath,  and   receiv'd   this  Anfwer,  That  the  Sabbath  was  a 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  699 

Palace  accommodated  with  the  beft  Wines,  the  niceft  Food,  the  hand- 
Jomejl  Women,  and  the  moft  agreeable  Mufick  in  the  World  ;  That 
in  this  Palace  they  Drink,  Eat  and  Dance,  and  do  with  the  fine 
Ladies,  what  they  might  do  elfewhere  without  being  Wizards. 
In  fine,  I  verily  believe,  that  [258]  Beafts  are  not  allow'd 
to  be  fo  Brutifh  as  thefe  Fools.  Imagination  can't  reach 
their  Folly ;  for  'tis  as  ufual  here  to  call  one  another  Wizard, 
as  to  ufe  the  compellation  of  a  Friend  elfewhere.  Every 
body  believes  the  Wizards  are  fo  numerous,  that  'tis  a 
Scandal  for  a  Man  not  to  pafs  for  one  of  the  Gang ;  and 
fo  every  one  glories  in  the  venerable  Title  of  a  Wizard  or 
Conjurer. 

Since  I  came  to  this  place  I  am  taken  for  an  Atheift,  becaufe 
I  tire  my  felf  in  inculcating  to  the  Priefts  and  Gentlemen,  that 
none  but  mallow  Brains  will  entertain  fuch  idle  Whims.  But 
that  which  throws  me  into  Difpair  is  the  News  that  a  Man  of 
your  Senfe  mould  gulp  down  fuch  monftrous  Flams,  notwith- 
ftanding  all  the  Arguments  that  guard  off  fuch  an  Opinion. 
Be  it  known  to  you,  Sir,  you  muft  abfolutely  deny  the  Omni- 
potence of  God,  if  you  eftablifh  in  this  World,  Sorcerers,  Magi- 
cians, Soothfayers,  Inchanters,  Apparitions,  Phantafms,  Famil- 
iars, Hobgoblins,  and  a  vifible  Devil  that  brings  up  the  rear 
of  all  thefe  Chimera's.  To  believe  that  God  makes  ufe  of 
Wizards  and  Magicians  to  afflict  Men,  or  blaft  the  Product 
of  the  Earth,  fpeaks  a  want  of  Religion,  Senfe  and  Wifdom. 
None  but  Europeans  are  capable  to  credit  fuch  Phantaftical 
Stories.  In  this  Country  every  body  takes  pleafure  in  recount- 
ing his  Virions,  and  there's  none  but  who  has  feen  or  heard 


yoo  Some  New  Voyages 

fome  Spirit  or  other  in  his  Life-time.    Few  dive  to  the  bottom 

of  thefe  popular  Errors ;  and  moft  People  would  fcruple  to 

believe  that  thefe  Errors  are  the  Inventions  of  Idolatrous  and 

Chriftian  Priefts.      The  World  entertains  too  favourable  an 

Opinion  of  the  Clergy  to  charge  'em  with  that  Crime ;  and  if 

by  chance  one  were  found  who  being  convinc'd  of  the  Cheats 

of  [259]  the  Priefts  makes  the  Oracles  promote  the  fpunging 

of  Mens  Pockets  and  Womens  Thighs,  an  infinity  of  ignorant 

Souls  would  ftill  disbelieve  him.     Believe  me,  Sir,  I  confine 

my  Difcourfe  to  thefe  Ancient  Priefts,  that  I  may  not  give  you 

Offence  by  reflecting  on  the  Induftry  of  the  Modern ;  I  have 

the  Pope's  Kettle  too  much  in  view  to  hinder  it  to  Boil,  for 

one  Day  it  may  come  to  be  my  laft  Refuge  ;  and  fo  I  ought 

to  hold  my  Peace.     This  Subject  would  require  a  clear  and 

diftindl    Differtation,   and    perhaps  I   may    prefent  you  with 

fome  fuch  thing  one  of  thefe  Days. 

In  the  mean  time  be  pleas'd  to  know 
*Bya  ftrong   Genius     that  a  *  ftrQng  Genjug  wiU  neyer  fuffer  [f. 

ft  and  a   "m  an]  hit  felf  to  believe  the  exiftence  of  Sorcerers, 

Fathoms  the  Nature  of  &c.  efpecially  confidering  that  they  are 

Things/  that  believes  all  as  poor  as  Church  Rats  ;  for  how  can 

nothing  but  what  is  we   imagjne   that   tnefe   pretended   Mif- 

maturely  weigh' d by  his  _                              n 

Reafon;  and  without  creants  ^ould  have  the  Courage  to  truft 

any  regard  to  Prejudice  themfelves  to  a  Mafter  who  is  fo  far  from 

makes  wife  Decifions  difcovering  to  'em  hidden  Treafures,  and 

upon  fuch  Heads  as  he  a  thoufand  other  things  in  the  Commerce 

has   clearly  canvafs'd.  .           ......           , 

of  the  World  which  might  inrich  em,  that 

he  fuffers  'em  to  be  Hang'd  and  Burnt?     Prithee,  how  can 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  701 

we  believe  that  God  impowers  thefe  poor  Wretches  to  raife 
Storms  and  overturn  the  Elements?  Tis  alledged  that  the 
Devil  inveigles  'em  by  Promifes,  and  makes  Contracts  with  'em 
under  a  private  Seal ;  but  from  thence  'twould  follow  that  God 
invefted  the  Devil  with  a  Power  to  feduce  thofe  poor  Mortals; 
which  at  the  fame  time  he  could  not  do  without  Authorizing 
Lies.  To  pretend  that  God  Arms  the  Enemy  of  [260]  Man- 
kind againft  Humane  Creatures,  is  a  downright  infulting  of 
his  Wifdom.  None  but  airy  Fools  can  entertain  the  Wicked- 
nefs  of  Sorcerers,  the  Cunning  of  Magicians,  the  Power  of 
Conjurers,  the  Apparitions  of  Spirits,  and  the  Soveraignty  of 
the  Devil,  for  Articles  of  Faith  :  For  fuch  Thoughts  are  only 
harbour'd  by  Fools  and  Bigots.  The  Vulgar  feed  themfelves 
with  fuch  Chimera's;  and  the  Parfons  that  preach  'em  up 
find  their  account  in  all  Countries.  Do  but  mind  what  I  fay, 
and  you'l  find  I'm  in  the  right  of  it.  In  former  Times  the 
Character  of  a  Philofopher  or  Mathematician  was  a  fufficient 
Qualification  for  a  Sorcerer.  The  Savages  believe  that  a 
Watch,  a  Compafs,  and  a  thoufand  other  Machines  are  moved 
by  Spirits ;  for  your  ignorant  and  clownifh  People  form 
extravagant  Ideas  of  every  thing  that  furpaffes  their  Imagina- 
tion. The  Laplanders  and  the  Tartarian  Kalmouks  ador'd 
Strangers  for  playing  Legerdemain  Tricks.  The  Fire-eater  at 
Paris  pafs'd  a  long  while  for  a  Magician.  The  Portuguefe 
burnt  a  Horfe  that  did  wonderful  things,  and  his  Owner  had 
enough  to  do  to  make  his  efcape,  becaufe  they  took  him  for  a 
Conjurer.  In  J  ft  a  the  Chymifts  are  look'd  upon  as  Poyfoners. 
-In  Africa  the  Mathematicians  bear  the  name  of  Wizards.     In 


702  Some  New  Voyages 

America  the  Phyficians  are  branded  for  Magicians  ;  and  in 
fome  parts  of  Europe  thofe  who  are  well  vers'd  in  the  Hebrew 
Tongue  are  deem'd  for  Jews. 

But  to  return  to  the  Cunning  Men  of  our  Country  ;  What 
reafon  have  we  to  think  that  Men  would  bequeath  their  Souls 
for  the  imaginary  Sabbatic  Pleafure  of  poyfoning  Cattle,  blad- 
ing Corn  with  Storms  and  Hail,  and  raifing  fuch  boifterous 
Winds  as  overturn  Trees,  and  ftrip  the  Earth  of  its  Fruits. 
One  would  think  thefe  [261]  Difciples  would  rather  ask 
Riches  of  him ;  for  if  the  Devil  is  capable  of  turning  the  Ele- 
ments topfy  turvy,  and  interrupting  the  Courfe  of  Nature, 
why  does  not  his  Power  extend  to  the  pumping  of  Gold  from 
the  Mines  of  Perou,  or  engroffing  the  Treafures  of  Europe,  in 
order  to  give  Penfions  to  his  Magical  Votaries,  who  are  as 
poor  as  Church  Mice?  I  know  you'l  anfwer,  That  pieces  of 
Silver  will  turn  into  Oak-leaves  in  the  Hands  of  the  Devil:  But 
that  Allegation  finks  his  Power  of  working  fo  many  Miracles, 
and  particularly  that  which  he  imparts  to  the  Wizards.  But 
fuppofing  that  he  is  not  allow'd  to  work  in  Silver ;  might  not 
fo  wife  a  Creature  as  he  is  reprefented  to  be,  teach  'em  the 
means  to  acquire  it  in  the  way  of  Commerce  or  Gaming? 
What  mould  hinder  him  to  conduct  'em  to  hidden  Treafures, 
or  to  fuch  as  are  loft  in  Shipwrack,  or  at  leaft  to  teach  'em  the 
Secret  that  enabled  the  Paffetes  Magician  to  recal  into  his 
Pocket  all  the  Money  he  fpent  ?  You'l  meet  with  fome  who 
maintain,  that  the  Devil  us'd  fuch  Methods  long  before  the 
Deluge,  to  precipitate  Men  into  a  Magical  Idolatry  :  But  if 
you  trace  fuch  Doctors  from  Confequence  to  Confequence, 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  703 

'twill  follow  that  God  was  guilty  of  a  flaming  piece  of  Malice, 

which  cannot  be.     I  would  not  have  you  to  be  furpriz'd  in 

finding  that  I  deny  Magicians  as  well  as  Sorcerers  or  Wizards  ; 

for  if  we  allow  of  the  one,  the  other  muft  be  acknowledg'd  in 

Courfe.      All   the  World   takes  Agrippa    for   the   Prince  of 

Magicians ;  but  at  the  fame  time  he  was  no  more  fuch  than 

you.      His    Magick   lay  here.1      Being  one  of  the  greateft 

Philofophers   of   his   Age,   and    having    given   proof  of   his 

Knowledge  before  the   Mob  of  Lions,  the  Women  were  fo 

charm'd  with  it,  that  almoft  all  of  'em  employ'd  him  to  cuckold 

their   [262]    Husbands,   and    at   the    fame   time    fome    Rival 

Monks  who  pretended  to  defcribe  the  Devil's  Art,  plac'd  him 

at  the  Head  of  the  five  Popes,  that  Berno  the  Schifmatick 

Cardinal  had  the  Infolence   to   brand   for   Magicians.      But 

Agrippa's  Book  made  the  fame  ImprefTion  upon  the  Minds 

of  Fools  with  the  Conjuring  Book  and  Heptameron  of  Appono. 

All  thefe  Chimera's  fpring  from  the  impertinent  Writers  of 

Conjuring,   who    have   fill'd    the  World  with  their  Illufions, 

either  thro'   Malice  or  Ignorance.      I    can't  look  upon  the 

Books  of  John  Nider  de  Fujer,  of  Niger,  Sprenger,  Platina, 

Toflat,  and  the  two  Jefuits  Delrio  and  Maldonat,  without  curf- 

ing  'em  for  ever ;  for  they  advance  Pofitions  fo  contrary  to 

Reafon,  and  inconfiftent  with  the  Wifdom  of  God,  that  all 

Chriftian  Princes  would  do  well  to  call  in  all  fuch  Books  and 

have  'em  burn'd  by  the  Hand  of  the  publick  Executioner, 


1  Cornelius  Agrippa,  of  Nettesheim,  who  attempted  in  the  fourteenth  century 
to  mitigate  the  horrors  of  witchcraft  superstition,  and  defended  an  accused  witch. 
Lahontan  refers  to  his  book,  Occulta  Philosophia.—  Ed. 


704  Some  New  Voyages 

without  {pairing  Bodinus's  De-monomania,  the  Mallet  of  Sorcerers, 
and  the  Seven  Trumpets.1  What  reafon  have  we  to  believe  that 
Eric  King  of  the  Goths  was  firnam'd  Windy  Hat,  becaufe  he 
becken'd  to  the  Winds  with  his  Hat,  and  made  'em  fhift  as  he 
pleas'd ;  That  Paracelfus  had  an  Army  of  Devils  under  his 
Command  ;  that  Santaberenus  fhew'd  to  Bafil  the  Emperor  his 
Son  alive  after  his  Death  ;  That  Michael  the  Scot  foretold  the 
Death  of  the  Emperor  Frederic  II.  That  Pythagoras  kill'd  a 
Serpent  in  Italy  by  Vertue  of  fome  Magical  Words?  And 
yet  thefe  Authors  vent  a  thoufand  Lies  of  that  nature  for 
uncontefted  Truths :  But  what  Gervais  fays  of  Virgil's  Brafs 
Fly  Crowns  the  whole  Work.  'Tis  a  Miracle  to  me  that  the 
Chancellor  of  the  Emperor  Otho  mould  have  thus  expos'd 
himfelf  in  advancing  a  Falfhood  accompany'd  with  many  other 
Lies.  From  hence  we  may  learn,  the  Dignity  of  a  Chancellor 
has  not  the  vertue  to  entail  [263]  Wifdom  upon  the  Fools 
that  brook  it.  Is  it  not  commonly  given  out  that  the  Devil 
run  away  with  Prefident  Pichon  ?  Who  has  not  heard  of 
Marfhal  Luxemburg's  Compact  with  the  Devil?  And  does 
not  the  World  blindly  believe  that  the  poor  Curate  of  Loudun, 


1  Lahontan  here  cites  a  group  of  authors  on  the  subject  of  magic.  Nider,  an 
inquisitor  of  the  fourteenth  century,  published  the  Formicarius,  a  treatise  on  heresy. 
Sprenger,  a  German  inquisitor,  was  the  author  of  the  manual  Malleus  Maleficarium 
(Mallet  of  Sorcerers) ,  which  was  ' '  the  most  portentous  monument  of  superstition  the 
world  has  produced."  Platina,  the  learned  author  of  Vita  Pontificium  (Lives  of  the 
Popes),  relates  many  tales  of  witchcraft.  Tostatus  was  a  Spanish  theologian  of  the 
fifteenth  century,  and  Delrio,  a  Jesuit,  whose  Disquisitiones  Magica  went  through 
frequent  editions  in  the  seventeenth  century.  Jean  Bodin's  Demonomanie  des  Bor- 
ders was  a  compilation  on  witchcraft.  For  the  entire  subject  consult  Lea,  History  of 
the  Inquisition  in  the  Middle  Ages  (New  York,  1888);  White,  History  of  Warfare 
of  Science  ivith  Theology  (New  York,  1896).  —  Ed. 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  705 

who  was  burnt  by  the  Tyranny  of  Cardinal  Richelieu,  without 
any  other  Crime  than  that  of  incurring  his  Difpleafure ;  Does 
not  every  one  believe,  I  fay,  that  this  poor  Curate  rais'd  a 
hundred  young  Devils  out  of  Hell  to  poffefs  the  Bodies  of 
the  Nuns  of  Loudan  ?  What  impertinent  and  childifh  Stories 
does  John  Schefer  offer  in  his  Hiftory  of  Lapland?  Is  not  it 
very  ftrange  that  the  People  mould  be  allow'd  to  read  fuch 
Books  ?  Are  not  fome  fo  foolifh  as  to  credit  thefe  Chimera's 
as  Articles  of  Faith?  And  is  it  poflible  for  you  to  difabufe 
'em,  or  to  perfwade  'em  that  no  Man  can  cure  Wounds  by 
the  fpeaking  of  a  few  Words,  or  that  the  Men  who  deal  in 
Characters  do  not  perform  all  forts  of  Miracles  by  vertue  of 
certain  Phials,  Garters,  &c?  No  truly,  Sir,  you  would  never 
compafs  your  end  if  you  offer'd  to  teach  'em  a  Doctrine  con- 
trary to  thefe  receiv'd  Opinions  ;  they  would  hang  you  for  a 
Heretick,  or  at  leaft  take  you  for  a  Magician  that  by  fuch  a 
cunning  fetch  mean'd  to  fcreen  the  whole  Magical  Fraternity 
from  Profecution. 

Believe  me,  Sir,  all  that  I  now  write  is  pofitively  true. 
The  Devil  has  not  the  Power  to  appear  vifibly  before  our 
Eyes,  and  by  confequence  he  can't  engage  us  in  his  Interefts 
by  a  Magical  or  Witchcraft  Contract.  Such  a  Suppofition  is 
inconfiftent  with  the  Goodnefs  of  God,  who  does  not  lay 
Snares  for  Men  that  are  already  apt  to  go  affray.  You  fee  I 
do  not  deny  the  Exiftence  of  the  Devil ;  for  I  believe  he  is  in 
Hell:  But  I  deny  that  he  ever  remov'd  from  [264]  the 
Regions  below,  to  do  mifchief  upon  the  Earth.     As  for  the 

Paffages  of  Scripture,  which  you  may  take  for  an  Objection,  I 
45 


706  Some  New  Voyages 

anfwer ;  That  if  all  the  Places  of  Scripture  were  to  be  under- 
ftood  in  a  Literal  Senfe,  God  would  be  fuppos'd  to  have 
Hands  and  Feet,  and  the  Holy  Ghoft  to  talk  like  an  Iroquefe. 
You  muft  know,  that  before  the  coming  of  the  Mejfias,  Dae- 
mons were  the  tutelar  and  benign  Gods  ;  and  the  Word 
Sai/xovviov  fignifies  nothing  elfe  but  Good  Genius ;  but  the 
Evangelifts  have  ftamp'd  upon  them  an  Infernal  Character,  by 
adding  the  Epithet,  Kuko,  i.  e.  Evil :  And  for  that  Reafon  the 
good  Devils  have  been  ever  fince  reputed  Evil  Spirits,  accord- 
ing to  the  Literal  Senfe.  Sir,  you  may  perceive,  I  only  infift 
againft  the  Exiftence  of  Sorcerers,  Magicians,  Inchanters,  &c. 
which  I  am  the  more  encourag'd  to  do,  upon  the  Confedera- 
tion, that  the  Interpreters  of  Holy  Writ  have  given  'em  Titles 
of  AJironomers,  Chiromancers,  Aftrologers,  &V.  and  in  giving  the 
Explication  of  thefe  fynonimous  Words,  never  alledg'd,  that 
they  were  the  Devil's  Scholars. 

This  Subject  would  require  a  large  Differtation ;  for  'tis 
truly  a  very  nice  Point,  which  I  only  pretend  to  glance  upon 
by  the  Bye,  without  fpending  more  time  in  juftifying  the 
Arraigned  Criminals  from  the  guilt  of  an  Imaginary  Crime, 
that  'tis  impoflible  for  them  to  put  in  execution.  Believe  me, 
Sir,  the  Magicians  are  Rogues  that  cut  a  Purfe  dexteroufly 
and  unhinge  a  Door  nimbly :  Your  Apparitions,  Phantomes, 
Hobgoblins  and  Spirits  are  Rafcally  Varlets,  that  in  the  Night 
time  Ileal  Corn  and  Fruit,  and  kifs  not  only  the  Servant- 
Maids,  but  fometimes  their  Matters  Wives :  Your  Inchanters 
are  roving  Fellows,  and  Lovers  by  Trade,  who  inveigle  poor 
Girls  under  a  Promife  of  Marriage.     Your  [265]  Soothfayers 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  707 

are  the  Cunning  Ecclefiafticks,  who  knowing  the  Foible  of 
fome  Rich  men,  extort  pious  Legacies  from  'em,  with  their 
wonted  Dexterity.  The  Sorcerers  are  thofe  Falfe  Coiners, 
who  abound  fo  much  in  our  Country,  and  the  Clippers,  who 
pare  the  Piaftres  and  the  Spanijh  Piftoles  fo  cleverly ;  for  thefe 
Sabbatic  Works  are  always  performed  in  the  Night-time,  and 
in  the  obfcureft  Places.  All  this  I  offer  for  your  information ; 
and  fo  fhall  leave  you  to  believe  what  you  pleafe. 

I  know  the  Bearnefe  are  too  much  inclined  to  Superftition, 
and   owe    their    Byas    to   the   Ancient 

Members  of  their  *  Parliament,  who  *  Held  at  Pau,  the  Cap- 
by  a  ftretch  of  Cruelty  beyond  that  of    *a  e     tovwce  °? 

J        J  Beam. 

N ero,  burnt  fo  many  Innocent  Wretches. 

If  thefe  Bigotted  Counfellers  are  now  in  Paradife,  moft  cer- 
tainly neither  you  nor  I  will  ever  be  fent  to  Hell :  Believe  me, 
Sir,  the  Man  that's  capable  of  giving  credit  to  the  Chimera's 
I  now  fpeak  of,  will  not  ftand  to  fwallow  a  thoufand  other 
Fables  that  your  Men  of  Senfe  make  a  Jeft  of.  I  do  not  pre- 
tend to  undeceive  the  Ignorant  Vulgar,  for  I  know  'tis  impof- 
fible ;  'tis  you  only  that  I  want  to  inftrudl ;  for  I'm  told,  you 
declare,  that  all  the  Cats  in  the  Province  have  the  honour  to 
be  animated  by  the  Souls  of  the  Ancient  Wizards,  whofe 
Ames  have  ferv'd  for  Lye  to  the  Wafher-women  of  Pau  thefe 
many  Years.  Our  Salvation  does  not  depend  upon  the  belief 
of  that  Article,  for  I'm  fure  'tis  no  Article  of  Faith.  Some 
People  are  very  ingenious  in  frightning  themfelves,  by  con- 
ceiving that  the  Devil  transforms  himfelf  into  a  Maftiff,  a 
Sorcerer  into  a  Cat,  and  a  Magician  into  a  Wolf;  that  a  Soul 


710  Some  New  Voyages 

way,  for  that  Cattel  is  not  fo  eafy  to  deal  with  as  Wizards  and 

Phantoms. 

I  defire  an  interview  at  Ortez:  The  Papers  I  now  fend 

along  with  this  Letter,  will  inform  you  of  the  Bufinefs  I  want 

to  difcourfe.     The  Country  I   am   now  in  is  a  very  good 

Country,  [268]  but  I  do  not  find  Mony  ftirring  among  us, 

which  in  my  troth  I  do  not  like,  for  among  the  Europeans  one 

can't  live  without  Money,  as  they  do  among  the  Hurons  of 

Canada.     I  always  think  of  that  Countrey  with  regret,  when 

my  Pocket  is  at  low  water$  and  my  Mind  difquieted  with  Care 

and  Anxiety,  in  contriving  how  to  fill  it  with  that  precious 

Metal,  that  gives  life  and  fpirit  to  the  forrieft  fort  of  Men, 

and  infpires  'em  with  all  Good  Qualities. 

/  am, 

SIR, 

Tours,  &c. 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  711 


LETTER  VI. 

Dated  at  Huefca,  July  n.  1695. 

Containing  an  Account  of  the  Author's  wonderful  Efcape;  his  being 
taken  up  for  a  Huguenot,  and  examin'd  by  the  Ignorant  Curates. 

I'VE  'fcap'd  for  once,  but  'twas  a  very  narrow  Efcape,  as 
you  may  guefs  by  the  Story  of  my  Flight,  which  was  in 
fhort  thus.  I  was  upon  the  point  of  meeting  you  according 
to  agreement  at  Ortez,  and  for  that  Reafon  had  been  at  Dax 
to  receive  fome  Papers  which  feem'd  to  be  of  ufe  to  me ; 
when  by  a  matchlefs  piece  of  Good  Luck,  [269]  I  met  with 
a  Letter  from  a  certain  perfon  at  Verfailles.  I  had  no  fooner 
read  my  Letter,  than  I  march'd  ftraight  to  my  Lodging,  to 
contrive  within  my  felf  fome  way  to  get  fafe  out  of  the  King- 
dom. You  may  be  fure  my  Council  was  foon  affembled,  for 
fuch  a  Head-piece  as  mine  does  not  ufe  to  fpend  much  time 
in  Confultations.  I  determined  to  delude  my  Landlord,  by 
defiring  him  to  give  me  an  Account  in  Writing  of  the  Road 
to  Agen,  where  I  pretended  to  have  fome  Bufinefs.  The  beft 
of  the  matter  is,  that  I  had  already  got  of  my  Farmers  near 
two  hundred  Piftoles,  and  a  fine  Horfe,  which  I  was  oblig'd  to 
for  my  lucky  deliverance.  I  got  up  by  the  break  of  day,  and 
defiVd  a  Guide  to  conduct  me  out  of  one  of  the  Gates  of  the 
City,  that  leads  a  quite  different  way  from  that  I  had  in  my  Eye. 


7i2  Some  New  Voyages 

As  foon  as  I  got  out  of  Town,  I  took  the  Road  of  Ortez, 
and  avoiding  all  Villages,  fteer'd  upon  Heaths,  Fields,  Vine- 
yards and  Woods,  following  all  By-paths,  and  lodging  in  the 
remoteft  Houfes ;  I  had  no  other  Guide  but  the  Sun,  and  the 
fight  of  the  Pyrenees,  and  ask'd  every  one  I  met  upon  the 
Road,  which  was  the  way  to  Pau.  But  not  to  detain  you  too 
long  with  the  Particulars  of  my  Journey,  you  muft  know,  I 
arrived  at  laft  at  Laruns,  the  laft  Village  of  Beam,  fcituated  as 
you  know,  in  the  Valley  of  Ozao.  I  had  fcarce  entred  this 
foolifh  Village,  when  a  Company  of  Peafants  furrounded  me 
on  all  fides :  Judge  you  if  I  had  not  reafon  to  fear  that  the 
Grand  Provoft  was  not  far  behind  ;  but  I  was  miftaken,  for  the 
Rafcals  ftop'd  me  for  no  other  Reafon,  but  becaufe  they 
fancied  there  was  fomewhat  in  my  Countenance  that  looked 
like  Huguenotifm  ;  they  gave  me  leave  however  to  alight  at  a 
Tavern,  which  was  fo  dark  and  full  of  Smoak,  that  you  would 
have  took't  [270]  for  the  Antichamber  to  Hell ;  and  here, 
you  muft  know  the  Parfon  was  to  come  to  examine  me  in 
Matters  of  Religion ;  and  that  in  a  Country  where  the  Priefts 
underftand  as  little  what  they  believe  as  their  Parimioners : 
Fo'r  after  I  had  anfwer'd  him  upon  all  the  Points  he  thought 
fit  to  mention,  he  fwore  I  was  a  Huguenot ;  and  upon  this,  Sir, 
I  was  like  to  have  loft  all  patience.  But  confidering  I  had 
Beafts  to  deal  with,  I  thought  my  beft  way  was  to  ufe  'em  as 
Beafts ;  fo  I  offer'd  to  fatisfie  'em  by  reciting  the  Litany,  and 
the  Sunday  Vefpers,  but  this  Stratagem  fail'd  me,  for  they  ftill 
continued  obftinate,  in  propofing  to  carry  me  to  Pau.  Judge 
what  a  perplexity  I  was  in,  when  the  Infamous  Rabble  faid, 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  713 

The  Pfalms  and  the  Litanies  were  the  firft  Prayers  the  Huguenots 
learn'd  to  cover  their  Defign  of  getting  out  of  the  Kingdom.  It  fig- 
nify'd  nought  to  tell  'em,  I  was  Mafter  of  the  Horfe  to  Mon- 
fieur  L'  Abbee  d'  Eftrees,  and  that  I  was  going  to  that  Ambaffa- 
dor  in  Portugal ;  that  was  Clamare  in  deferto.  'Twas  to  as 
little  purpofe  to  threaten  to  fend  immediately  to  the  Inten- 
dant  at  Pau,  to  demand  Juftice  for  the  Affront,  and  for  my 
being  ftopt :  All  this  did  not  move  'em.  At  laft,  after  a 
melancholly  Reflection  on  the  danger  I  was  in,  I  refolv'd  to 
try  all  ways  to  delude  thefe  Ignorant  Creatures  ;  though  this 
was  no  eafy  task,  for  they  are  wholly  govern'd  by  their  Doc- 
tors. And  here  I  think  I  ought  to  pray  to  God  to  blefs  the 
firft  Inventer  of  Snuff,  for  after  I  had  fretted  my  felf  two  or 
three  Hours  in  talking  to  thefe  Varlets,  I  accidentally  pull'd 
out  my  Snuff-box,  without  thinking  of  it,  and  as  foon  as  I 
open'd  it,  one  of  the  moft  Civiliz'd  Men  of  the  Company 
defir'd  to  fee  the  Picture  on  the  Infide,  which  reprefented  a 
Court-Lady  upon  a  Couch,  all  naked,  with  her  Hair  hanging 
loofe.  As  foon  as  he  [271]  had  looked  upon  it,  he  fhow'd  it 
to  the  reft,  who  faid  to  one  another  in  their  Bernoife  Lan- 
guage, That  it  was  a  Mary  Magdalene.  At  this  Lucky  Word, 
I  rouz'd  my  Spirits,  when  all  on  a  fudden  the  Parfon  ask'd 
me,  What  the  Meaning  of  the  Picture  was?  I  made  anfwer, 
'Twas  a  Saint  that  would  take  Vengeance  of  them  for  an  Affront 
offered  to  one  of  her  Devouleft  Worfliippers :  And  fo  fixing  my 
Eyes  upon  the  Naked  Figure,  I  made  a  Prayer  to  that  Saint 
with  an  Elogy;  in  which  I  attributed  more  Miracles  to  her 
than  to  all  the  Saints  in  Paradife.     This,  together  with  the 


714  Some  New  Voyages 

Exclamations  I  made,  did  fo  blind  the  Company,  that  they  all 
kifs'd  the  Head  of  the  Pretended  Saint  with  a  wonderful 
Zeal,  and  from  that  time  I  was  no  Huguenot,  for  I  ftill  con- 
tinued to  invoke  the  Saint  that  in  Beam  is  known  to  be  a 
worker  of  Miracles,  with  the  fame  fury  and  difpofition  that  I 
then  feign'd.  Every  one  ftrove  to  get  my  Prayers  down  in 
Writing,  and  all  the  Peafants  now  were  at  Emulation  one  with 
another  who  mould  guide  me  over  the  Mountains,  or  who 
mould  furnifh  me  with  Mules.  Such,  Sir,  is  the  diverting 
Hiftory  of  the  ftrange  Effects  of  Snuff :  If  it  is  of  ufe  to  others, 
to  hammer  out  an  Argument  by  gaining  the  time  which  is 
fpent  in  conveying  it  from  the  Fingers  to  the  Nofe,  'twas  of 
great  ufe  to  me  another  way,  without  fo  much  as  expecting  it. 
What  a  Misfortune  it  is  for  an  Honeft  Man  to  be  under  a 
Neceflity  of  prophaning  the  Saints  for  the  prefervation  of  his 
Life !  'Tis  true,  my  Meaning  was  good,  and  I  have  asked 
Pardon  of  God  for  it.  This  fhews  that  a  well  manag'd  Lye 
can  produce  among  Ignorant  People  even  fuch  Effects  as  the 
Naked  Truth  cannot  compafs.  What  pity  is  it  that  a  Parfon 
mould  not  fo  much  as  underftand  his  Catechifm,  and  at  the 
fame  time  [272]  fwallow  down  Idle  Stories  for  Miracles !  But 
this  is  the  Bifhop's  Bufinefs,  not  mine. 

And  indeed  our  Bifhops  are  much  like  our  Officers,  who 
are  prefer'd  more  by  Favour  and  Intereft  than  by  Merit. 
The  greateft  part  of  them  are  more  induftrious  to  pleafe  their 
Sovereign  than  their  God.  But  a  man  had  as  good  pretend 
to  drink  the  Ocean  dry,  as  to  attempt  a  Reformation  of  thefe 
Abufes. 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  715 

To  continue  the  Thread  of  my  Adventure,  you  muft 
know,  I  hired  two  Mules,  one  for  my  Guide,  another  for  my 
felf.  My  Horfe  was  fo  tired  with  ftrugling  to  fave  me,  that 
Gratitude  obliged  me  to  ufe  him  with  all  manner  of  civility 
and  mildnefs ;  for  'twas  no  more  than  what  he  deferved  by 
his  fatiguing  Services.  In  the  mean  time  the  Night,  which 
feem'd  as  long  to  me  as  an  Age,  (fo  much  I  dreaded  the 
Provoft's  Crew)  gave  me  more  leifure  than  enough  to  beg 
pardon  of  God  for  the  Contrivance  by  which  I  faved  my  felf, 
in  making  ufe  of  the  Names  of  his  Saints.  In  this  Condition 
I  was  continually  peeping  at  the  Window  to  look  for  the 
dawning  of  the  Day,  but  this  Village  is  fo  fhut  up  among  the 
Pyrenees,  that  'tis  a  hard  matter  to  difcern  the  Sun  in  his 
Meridian,  or  the  tenth  part  of  the  Arch  of  the  Heavens.  At 
laft  wearied  with  that  uneafinefs,  and  quite  fpent  with  the 
Fatigues  both  of  Body  and  Mind,  I  tried  to  indulge  Nature 
with  one  Hours  fleep  as  a  recompence  for  three  Days  waking, 
when  all  on  a  fudden  I  was  alarm'd  with  a  great  Noife  of 
Men  and  Horfes  at  the  Inn-Gate ;  the  Knocks  they  gave,  and 
their  Grange  Hollowing,  freez'd  all  the  Blood  in  my  Veins, 
for  I  thought  all  the  Conftables  in  the  Kingdom  were  upon 
my  Back;  but  my  Fears  prov'd  abortive,  for  it  was  only  fome 
Muliteers  going  to  traffick  in  Spain.  [273]  By  this  time 
Day-light  appear'd,  and  my  Guide  called  upon  me,  upon 
which  we  fet  out,  and  join'd  in  with  thefe  Travellers  :  That 
Day  we  went  as  far  as  Salient,  the  firft  Town  in  Spain,  feven 
Leagues  diftant  from  Laruns ;  having  pafs'd  a  Houfe  which 
the  Spaniards  call  Aignes  Caudes,  that  is,  the  Hot-waters,  or 


71 6  Some  New  Voyages 

a  Bath  which  cures  a  world  of  Difeafes.  When  we  were  got 
to  Salient,  they  fhewed  us  to  an  Inn,  fo  dark,  that  it  feem'd 
fitter  for  a  Vault  to  lodge  Dead-Carcafes  in,  than  to  entertain 
Paffengers  ;  my  Spirits  were  then  fo  exhaufted  for  want  of  reft, 
that  I  fell  afleep  immediately,  and  flept  (landing  in  a  manner; 
the  Beds  looking  like  a  Magazine  of  Lice,  I  made  them 
fpread  me  fome  Straw  upon  the  Boards,  where  I  laid  my  felf 
down,  after  having  order'd  my  Guide  to  provide  for  himfelf 
what  Cheer  he  lik'd  beft,  upon  the  Provifo  that  he  mould  not 
wake  me.  I  flept  in  this  Pofture  from  Nine  a  Clock  at  Night 
till  Noon  next  Day  without  waking  ;  after  which  we  fpent  the 
reft  of  the  Day  in  finding  out  a  forry  Meal  of  Meat :  The 
next  Day  after  we  put  on  very  fmartly,  and  came  to  an  Inn 
where  we  found  good  ftore  of  Fouls  and  Pigeons,  and  upon 
thefe  we  made  reprifals  for  our  former  111  Fare.  In  fhort,  we 
arriv'd  laft  Night  at  this  City,  which  ftands  upon  a  flat  low 
Ground,  at  the  diftance  of  Two  Leagues  from  the  Mountains. 
All  I  can  tell  you  of  the  Country,  is;  That  from  Laruns  to 
this  Place,  we  have  two  and  twenty  Leagues  diftance  ;  and 
upon  that  Road  we  do  nothing  but  climb  up  and  defcend 
narrow  Paths,  upon  which,  if  the  Mule  did  but  ftumble, 
there's  an  unavoidable  neceflity  of  tumbling  down  a  Difmal 
Precipice.  My  Guide  [274]  told  me,  That  the  Road  through 
the  Valley  of  Afpe,  is  the  pleafanteft,  fliorteft  and  moft  con- 
venient ;  but  the  way  which  leads  by  St.  John  de  Pied  de  Port 
has  this  advantage,  that  there's  only  Eight  Leagues  of  Moun- 
tains between  Roncevaux  and  the  Plains  of  Navarre.  Upon 
the  whole,  I  wonder  much  that  Hercules  did  not  fplit  thefe 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  717 

Mountains  for  the  Accommodation  of  Travellers,  as  well  as 
thofe  of  Calpe  and  Ablla  for  the  Conveniency  of  Sailers.  I 
fet  out  to  morrow  by  the  break  of  Day,  in  order  to  reach 

Saragoza  at  Night. 

/  am, 

SIR, 

Tours,  &c. 


718  Some  New  Voyages 


LETTER   VII. 

Dated  at  Saragoza,  Octob.  8.  1695. 

Containing  a  Defcription  of  Saragoza ;  a  View  of  the  Government 
of  Arragon,  and  an  account  of  the  Cuftoms  of  the  People. 

SIR, 

I  HAVE  been  three  Months  in  this  good  Town  of  Saragoza, 
during  which  time,  I've  receiv'd  feven  or  eight  Letters, 
charging  me  with  Careleffnefs  in  not  fatisfying  your  Curi- 
ofity :  But  the  fault  lies  at  your  own  Door  and  not  at  mine ; 
[275]  for  if  you  had  not  been  fo  negligent  as  to  delay  the 
fending  of  what  I  receiv'd  this  very  day,  my  Pen  had  not 
trac'd  the  uneafynefs  of  my  Mind,  inftead  of  purfuing  the  fol- 
lowing Relation. 

Saragoza  is  the  Capital  City  of  the  Kingdom  of  Arragon  : 
And  I  can't  tell  whether  I  ought  to  call  it  only  pretty,  or  very 
pretty.  However,  I'm  fure  'tis  a  very  great  City;  the  Streets 
are  broad  and  well  pav'd;  the  Houfes  are  for  the  moft  part 
three  Story  high,  tho'  fome  of  'em  have  five  or  fix ;  and  all  of 
'em  are  Built  after  the  old  Fafhion.  The  Market  and  publick 
Places  are  not  worth  fpeaking  of.  In  the  City  there  are  a 
great  many  Convents,  which  are  generally  very  pretty;  as  well 
as  their  Gardens  and  Churches.  The  Cathedral  Church  call'd 
La  Ceu  is  a  huge  and  very  Stately  Edifice.     The  Church  of 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  719 

Naeftra  Seniora  de  V  Pilar  is  but  very  ordinary  as  to  its  Archi- 
tecture. The  Chappel  indeed  where  that  Seniora  ftands  is 
Curious,  upon  the  account  that  'tis  under  Ground.  The 
Spaniards  pretend  that  the  Subftance  of  which  'tis  Built  is 
unknown  to  all  Mankind;  but  if  'twere  not  for  their  affertion, 
I  fhould  have  took  it  for  Walnut-Tree.  This  Chappel  is  thirty 
fix  Foot  long,  and  twenty  fix  Foot  broad.  'Tis  fill'd  with 
Lamps,  Banifters  and  Silver  Candle-Sticks ;  and  befides  a 
great  Altar,  contains  a  great  quantity  of  Feet,  Hands,  Hearts 
and  Heads,  which  the  Miracles  of  that  Virgin  drew  to  the 
Sacred  Place  :  For  you  know  the  Virgin  Works  Miracles  every 
day  that  furpafs  imagination.  But  the  moft  folid  thing  about 
her,  is  an  infinity  of  precious  Stones  of  ineftimable  value,  with 
which  her  Gown,  Crown  and  Niche  are  GarnifiVd.  Befides 
thefe,  there  are  two  Churches  here  which  were  Built  by  the 
Goths,  and  are  both  Strong  and  Beautiful;  having  very  pretty 
Vaults,  which  fhew  [276]  that  that  People  were  perfectly  well 
acquainted  with  Stereometry. 

Saragoza  is  Seated  on  the  River  Ebro,  which  is  as  broad  as 
the  Seyne  at  Paris.  It  ftands  upon  fmooth  level  Ground,  and 
incompafs'd  with  a  Wall  that's  Ruinous  in  feveral  places.  The 
People  of  Arragon  put  a  mighty  value  upon  a  Stone-Bridge 
that's  over  that  River ;  becaufe  they  never  faw  many  better : 
But  they  have  more  reafon  to  value  the  Wooden-Bridge  that 
lyes  a  little  lower,  for  indeed  'tis  one  of  the  fineft  in  Europe. 
This  City  affords  Academies  for  the  exercife  both  of  the  Body 
and  the  Mind ;  and  above  all,  a  fine  Univerfity  that  may  be 
call'd  the  beft  in  Spain  next  to  Salamanca  and  Alcala  des  He- 


720  Some  New  Voyages 

nares.     The  Students  are  generally  Cloath'd  like  Priefts,  that  is, 
with  a  long  Cloak. 

The  Duke  de  Jovenazo  is  Viceroy  of  this  Kingdom ;  and  as 
I  take  it,  that  triennial  Dignity  is  more  Honourable  than  Bene- 
ficial, for  it  does  not  bring  in  above  fix  thoufand  Crowns  a  Year. 
The  Arch-Bifhoprick  is  worth  twenty  thoufand  Crowns ; 
but  the  prefent  Arch-Bifhop  being  a  very  good  Man,  diftrib- 
utes  one  third  of  his  Revenue  among  the  Poor.  Tho'  his 
Birth  was  obfcure,  yet  he  was  Prefident  of  one  of  the  Councils 
of  Spain,  which  perhaps  occafion'd  that  natural  Antipathy  to 
the  French,  that  he  mews  upon  all  occafions.  The  Canons  of 
his  Cathedral  and  thofe  of  Notre  dame  de  Pilier,  make  a  hun- 
dred Crowns  a  Month  of  their  Canonfhips.  The  Minifter 
call'd  *  Ell  jujlicia,  receives  Appeals  from 

*  His  place  is  much  all  the  Courts  of  Arragon.     'Tis  from  his 

like  that  of #  Chan-  TT       .       ,          ,       __.              .   „ 

„  Hands  that  the  Kings  of  bpatn  receive  a 

cellour.  &              r 

drawn  Sword,  when  they  take  the  Oath  to 
maintain  the  Privileges  of  the  Kingdom,  upon  their  Acceffion 
to  the  [277]  Throne.  This  Ceremony  is  perform'd  in  the 
Deputation-Houfe,  which  indeed  is  a  wonderful  Edifice.  The 
Salmedina  is  a  fort  of  Lieutenant-General,  both  Civil  and  Mili- 
tary. This  Office,  which  bears  both  the  Gown  and  the  Sword, 
is  Triennial  as  well  as  that  of  his  Deputy.  The 
t  Audiencia  confifts  of  feveral  Counfellours, 
who  are  as  nice  a  fort  of  Men  as  our  own.  Befides  thefe,  there 
are  five  Sheriffs  or  Jurates,  who  hold  their  troublefome  Pofts 
but  two  years,  and  are  properly  the  Civil  Judges  that  take 
care  of  the  Government  of  the  City.     In  fine,  I  fhould  never 


^7 


w«^^/^_^^ 


Q  Q  © 


©©©©©©©© 


»/   v'    V  t-:   ;7 

>T    ^   ^    ^    ^    -•*•    T^    %C  5?    "*"-   V- 


H 


<— 


-+ 


-> 


->       -> 


->      ^        ->         ->         w-^ 


R 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  721 

have  done,  if  I  offer'd  to  give  a  particular  Lift  of  all  the  Offices 
in  this  Kingdom. 

Bread,  Wine,  Fowl,  Partridges  and  Hares  are  very  cheap 
in  this  place ;  but  Butchers  Meat  is  very  dear,  and  good  Fifh 
is  a  rarity.  The  Strangers  that  Travel  this  way,  are  oblig'd 
to  Lodge  in  certain  Inns  call'd  by  the  Spaniards,  Me/on;  in 
which  the  Inn-Keeper  furnifhes  nothing  to  his  Guefts  but  a 

Chamber,  a  Bed,  a  Stable,  ||  Straw  and 

t,     ,  ,t-,.  .        c  .       1  There's  nether  Hay 

Barley.      Tis   true,   the   Servants    buy     "  .         . 

J  .        nor  Lorn  in  opatn. 

what  you  pleafe  for  you,  and  drefs  it 

as  you  order  'em,  provided  you  require  nothing  but  plain 
Boiling  and  Rofting.  The  Arragon  Wines  are  fweet  and 
ftrong,  efpecially  the  Black  fort,  for  the  White  is  neither  fo 
ftrong  nor  fo  fweet.  In  the  Summer  time  they  have  no  other 
Diverfion  but  Walking,  and  that  towards  the  Evening,  when 
the  Gentlemen  walk  out  of  Town,  as  well  as  the  Ladies, 
apart :  But  'tis  not  the  frefh  Air  fo  much  as  the  warm  breath- 
ing that  they  have  in  view.  In  Winter,  they  are  entertain'd 
with  Plays,  which  the  Priefts  and  Friars  frequent  without  any 
Scruple.  Every  Night  there's  an  Affembly  or  Meeting  at 
the  Houfe  of  the  Duke  [278]  of  Jovenazo,  where  they  Game, 
and  Difcourfe  and  drink  Chocolate  or  other  Liquors:  And 
the  Perfons  of  the  firft  Rank  are  almoft  always  there.  They 
are  honeft  and  affable  to  the  laft  degree.  As  for  my  own 
part,  I  have  receiv'd  very  fenfible  Marks  of  their  Friendfhip, 
particularly  that  of  being  regal'd  in  their  Houfes ;  which 
difcovers  to  me  that  they  are  not  fo  unfociable  as  they  are 
reprefented  to  be.     'Tis  true,  that  in  publick  the  Smile  never 

46 


722  Some  New  Voyages 

unfurles  their  Brow,  and  no  familiarity  of  Joy  can  oblige  'em 
to  relent  in  their  affected  Gravity :  But  in  private  Converfation 
they  are  the  heartieft  People  in  the  World  ;  I  mean,  they  are 
the  briskeft  and  merryeft  Companions  that  can  be. 

Almoft  all  the  People  of  Arragon  are  as  lean  as  I  am,  and 
fo,  Sir,  you  may  eafily  judge  what  a  fort  of  Meen  they  have. 
They  allege  for  the  caufe  of  their  Leannefs,  that  their  Tranf- 
piration  is  great,  that  they  Eat  and  Sleep  but  little,  that  their 
Paflions  are  fprightly  and  violent ;  and  in  fine,  that  they  diffi- 
pate  their  Spirits  by  exercifes  which  the  French  do  not  follow 
fo  often.  Their  Complexion  is  as  pale  as  mine ;  which  per- 
haps is  owing  to  thefe  very  exercifes ;  at  leaftwife,  'tis  Ovid's 
Opinion  in  faying  [Palleat  ommis  amor;  Color  hie  eft  aptus 
amanti.']  Their  Stature  goes  fomewhat  beyond  the  middling 
Standard.  Their  Hair  is  of  a  dark  Chefnut  colour,  and  their 
Complexion  is  as  fair  as  that  of  the  Bearnefe. 

All  I  have  faid  of  the  People  of  Arragon,  may  be  apply'd 
in  particular  to  the  Women  as  well  as  the  Men ;  tho'  indeed 
the  former  are  not  quite  fo  lean  as  the  latter.  They  can't  be 
call'd  handfome,  but  at  the  fame  time  one  can't  avoid  owning 
that  they  are  agreeable  and  lovely.  If  Nature  has  been  ftingy 
and  penurious  in  Forming  their  Throat  and  Fore-Head,  fhe 
has  been  prodigal  [276,  i.  e.  279]  of  her  Gifts  in  giving  'em 
great  fparkling  Eyes,  fo  full  of  Fire  that  they  burn  without 
mercy  from  top  to  toe  all  that  approach  to  'em.  They  are 
very  much  oblig'd  to  Theano,  Pythagoras 's  Wife,  for  teaching 
'em  that  their  Sex  was  Born  for  no  other  end  than  for  the 
agreeable  Trade  of  loving  and  being  lov'd.     This  foft  Moral 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  723 

fuits  their  Complexion  perfectly  well ;  and  accordingly  they 
pra&ife  it  to  a  Miracle :  For  in  the  Morning  they  run  to 
Church,  with  intent  to  purchafe  Hearts  rather  than  Paradife ; 
and  Dinner  is  no  fooner  over,  than  they  go  to  Vifit  their  She- 
Friends,  who  do  mutual  Services  to  one  another  in  the  way  of 
Intrigue,  by  favouring  the  entry  of  their  Lovers  into  one 
another's  Houfes,  and  that  with  a  great  deal  of  artifice  and 
cunning.  Contrivance  is  all  in  all  in  this  Country;  for  the 
vertue  of  the  Women  lies  in  playing  their  Cards  handfomely 
and  dextroufly,  difguifing  the  Intrigue,  more  than  elfewhere. 
Their  Husbands  are  plaguy  Sharp-fighted,  and  if  their 
Intrigues  take  but  the  leaft  Air,  they  run  the  rifque  of  taking 
a  Journey  to  the  other  World,  unlefs  they  flie  to  a  Convent. 
'Tis  not  above  a  Month  and  a  half  fince  I  faw  a  Girl  Stabb'd  by 
her  own  Brother  at  Church,  at  the  very  foot  of  the  Altar,  for 
having  entertain'd  an  amorous  Correfpondence.  He  had  made 
a  Journey  from  Madrid  on  purpofe  to  do  this  mighty  Exploit ; 
for  which  he  was  Punifh'd  with  two  Months  Imprifonment. 

There  has  not  been  above  eighteen  or  twenty  defign'd 
Murders  and  AffafTinations  committed  fince  I  came  hither;  by 
reafon  that  the  Nights  are  as  yet  too  fhort :  But  I  am  told 
that  in  Winter  there  never  paffes  a  Night  without  two  or 
three  fuch  inftances.  'Tis  true,  'tis  only  the  poor  miferable 
Wretches  of  two  Parifhes  in  the  City,  who  infult  [280]  one 
another  at  that  rate  ;  and  are  drove  to  that  extremity  by  Feuds 
of  ancient  ftanding.  The  frequency  of  fuch  diforders  is  owing 
to  this,  that  a  Man  can't  be  condemn'd  to  die  without  great 
Evidence  upon  the  matter,  and  that  the  Condemn'd  Criminals 


724  Some  New  Voyages 

make  ufe  of  the  privileges  of  the  Kingdom,  to  put  off  the 
Execution  from  Term  to  Term :  By  which  means  they  get  off 
at  laft  for  being  turn'd  over  to  the  Galleys,  which  there  are  a 
thoufand  ways  to  get  clear  of:  So  that  unlefs  the  Judge  is 
Sollicited  againft  them  by  a  ftrong  Party,  they  always  'fcape 
the  Gallows. 

As  for  Robbing  in  the  Streets,  they  know  nothing  of  it ; 
and  the  Murders  that  happen  have  no  relation  to  any  inten- 
tion of  that  Nature.  I  have  frequently  Walk'd  home  all  alone 
at  Midnight  from  the  Viceroy's  Houfe,  without  meeting  with 
any  affront.  'Tis  true,  I  difcontinued  that  practice  after  the 
Perfons  of  Quality  advis'd  me  to  go  always  in  Company,  left 
the  Affaffins  mould  miftake  me  for  another.  However,  Per- 
fons of  Note  or  Character  have  nothing  to  fear,  unlefs  they  be 
imbarqu'd  in  fome  Amorous  Intrigue  ;  then  indeed  they  run 
the  rifque  of  being  Stabb'd  in  the  Streets  at  Noon :  So  that  a 
Man  muft  either  have  his  Wits  about  him,  or  elfe  have  recourfe 
to  common  Whores,  if  he  means  to  avoid  fuch  a  fatal  Exit. 
Now  of  thefe  two  Expedients  the  firft  is  the  beft,  becaufe  it 
preferves  at  once  his  Pocket  and  his  Health. 

The  Nobility  of  Arragon  is  tolerably  Rich  ;  but  they  might 

be  Richer  if  the  Peafants  of  Arragon  Work'd  as  hard  as  ours 

do.      Thefe    idle    Fellows    imploy    the 

t  An  Epithet  they  give  |  Gavachos  (with  whom  Spain  is  plagued) 
to  the  French,  which  at  ^     »,  .    .     ^  ,  c 
,    ,          r    .r         ,  to  Manure  their  Grounds,  and  to  bow 
the  bottom  Jignifies  noth- 
ing at  all.  and  Reap.     The  Vulgar  People  [281] 

are  of  the  Opinion  that  France  is  the 

worft  Country  in  the  World,  becaufe  the  French  exchange  it 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  725 

for  theirs :  And  indeed  'tis  true,  that  the  Labourers,  the 
Reapers,  the  Fellers  of  Wood,  and  all  forts  of  Tradefmen, 
without  mentioning  the  Coach-men,  Foot-men  and  Water- 
bearers,  come  for  the  mod  part  from  Beam,  Languedock,  and 
Auvergne.  Here  we  meet  with  fome  Beam  Merchants  who 
have  inrich'd  themfelves  by  Trading  to  France :  For  notwith- 
standing the  War,  an  open  Commerce  is  ftill  maintain'd.  If 
the  People  of  Arragon  had  their  Wits  about  'em,  and  had  a 
mind  to  inrich  their  Country,  they  might  eafily  compafs 
their  end. 

The  River  of  Ebro  is  Navigable  from  Tortoza  to  Miranda 
d'  Ebro,  by  great  flat  bottom'd  Boats,  fuch  as  we  have  in  the 
Seyne.  A  great  many  Perfons  who  have  come  down  the  Ebro, 
have  aflur'd  me  that  'tis  three  Foot  deep  in  the  Shalloweft 
places,  and  that  its  Current  is  very  gentle :  So  that  the  only 
difficulty  lies  in  finding  a  Road  upon  the  Banks  of  the  River, 
in  order  to  drag  up  the  Boats  when  they  want  to  ftem  the 
Stream.  The  French  bring  hither  a  great  many  Mules  and 
little  Nags,  upon  which  they  gain  Cent  per  Cent,  all  Charges 
difcounted.  Thefe  Mules  are  made  ufe  of  to  draw  the 
Coaches  and  *  Galeras :    For  the  Eftra- 

madura   Mules  are  very  dear,   and   do     *  Great  Carts  drawn  by 

lL  •       •     iL •     P  r  1,         •        eight  Mules,  which  hold 

not  thrive  in  this  Country  io  well  as  in      .  «...  .      .    .      •  , 

J  eight  hundred  weight. 

the  Southern  Countries  of  Spain.     As 

for  the  little  Galloway's,  they  commonly  fell  beft  in  the  King- 
dom of  Valencia,  where  the  Peafants  imploy  'em  for  different 
ufes.  The  Coaches  of  that  Country  are  much  of  the  fame 
Form  with  our  Travelling-Coaches  in  France  ;  and  they  go  fo 


726  Some  New  Voyages 

very  flowly  that  they  would  not  drive  round  the  Town  in  the 
longeft  Summer's  day.  The  cuftom  [282]  of  Vifiting  upon 
Horfe-Back,  prevails  here  as  well  as  in  Portugal.  The  Gentle- 
men and  Officers  are  drefs'd  after  the  French  way ;  for  they 
find  the  Spanijh  Habit  unfufferable,  by  reafon  of  the  Golilla, 
or  a  fort  of  Collar,  in  which  the  Neck  is  fo  lac'd  up,  that  they 
can't  turn  or  bow  the  Head. 

The  Women's  Garb  feems  ridiculous  to  Strangers,  tho'  at 
the  bottom  'tis  not  fuch.     I  am  already  convinc'd  that  'tis 
infinitely  preferable  to  ours.     The  Spanijh  Women  can't  cover 
any  defect  of  Nature ;  for  they  wear  neither  Hoods,  Heels, 
nor  Whale-bone  Bodice.    Were  the  French  Ladies  oblig'd  to 
go  in  this  fafhion,  'twould  not  be  in  their  Power  to  deceive  fo 
many  Men  by  their  artificial  Towers,  their  Shooe-Heels  and 
their  falfe  Hips.     'Tis  true,  the  Spanifk  Women  may  be  cen- 
fur'd  for  difcovering  their  Shoulders  and  half  their  Arms : 
But  at  the  fame  time,  the  French  muft  not  go  uncheck'd  for 
expofing  to  open  eye  two  parts  that  are  at  once  more  fenfible 
and  more  tempting ;  for  if  it  be  alleg'd  that  the  former  give 
offence  backwards,  by  the  fame  juftice  it  may  be  reply'd  that 
the  latter  fcandalife  before.     In  fine,  as  the  Women  of  this 
Country  lye  under  reftraints,  fo  they  have  the  fatisfaclion  of 
being  very  much  refpe&ed ;    for  when  they  pafs  along  the 
Streets  either  in  Coach  or  on  Foot,  with  their  Face  uncover'd, 
every  body  flops  to  make  'em  a  Bow,  which  they  anfwer  by 
bowing  the  Head  without  bending  the  Knee.     Their  Gentle- 
men-Ufhers,  who  are  always  old  Fellows  paft  the  reach  of 
Sufpicion,  give  'em  their  bare  hand ;   for  fuch  is  the  Spanijh 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  727 

way :  And  thefe  are  the  only  priviledg'd  Perfons  that  have 
the  benefit  of  touching  their  hands ;  for  when  a  Cavalier 
happens  accidentally  to  be  near  the  Holy  Water  while  a  Lady 
offers  to  come  to  it,  he  [283]  makes  his  Beads  in  the  Water,  in 
order  to  prefent  'em  to  her.  The  fame  is  the  cafe  in  Dancing, 
which  do's  not  happen  often:  For  the  Gentleman  and  the 
Lady  come  no  nearer  than  the  two  ends  of  a  Handkerchief, 
by  which  they  hold  ;  and  fo  you  may  guefs  how  Buffing  would 
go  down  in  this  Country. 

I  muft  tell  you,  the  Spaniards  are  not  fo  ftern  and  unfo- 
ciable  as  they  are  reprefented ;  which  you'll  perceive  from  a 
(lender  account  of  their  way  of  Entertainment.  A  Gentleman 
that  I  met  frequently  at  the  Viceroy's,  and  at  the  Academies,  did 
me  the  honour  to  Vifit  me ;  and  I  return'd  his  Compliment  in 
the  fame  way.  When  I  came  to  return  the  Vifit,  he  receiv'd 
me  at  the  Stair-Head,  and  conducted  me  to  a  Hall,  where  we 
convers'd  for  half  an  hour ;  after  which  I  ask'd  how  his  Lady 
did,  and  he  made  anfwer,  that  he  believ'd  [he  was  jo  well  as  to 
receive  us  in  her  Chamber.  This  done,  the  Chocolate  and  Bif- 
kuyts  began  to  appear ;  upon  which  the  Gentleman  rofe  and 
introduc'd  me  to  his  Lady's  Chamber.  The  Lady  flood  up 
till  we  made  our  Honours,  and  fate  down  upon  her  Sofa, 
while  Chairs  were  fetting  for  us.  I  told  her  I  was  infinitely 
oblig'd  to  her  Husband  for  procuring  me  the  honour  of 
Saluting  her.  She  made  anfwer ;  that  he  look'd  upon  me  as  a 
Spaniard.  After  that  we  drank  fome  Chocolate,  and  me  ask'd 
me  if  I  lik'd  it,  and  whether  the  French  Ladies  us'd  to  drink 
it.     This  Interview  lafted  but  half  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  for 


728  Some  New  Voyages 

being  affraid  of  infringing  upon  the  Spanifh  Formalities,  I 

rofe,  and  after  taking  leave  walk'd  out  of  the  Room  with  her 

Husband,  who  invited  me  to  Dinner.     We  walk'd  till  Dinner 

time  in  the  Garden,  and  after  the  Gentleman  had  fhewn  me 

his  Horfes,  we  went  up  again  to  the  Hall,  where  the  Table 

Cloath  was  laid:  In  [284]  a  moment  in  came  the  Lady,  and 

Saluting  us  after  her  way,  took  her  place  on  one  fide  of  the 

Table,  as  we  did  on  the  other.     Firft  of  all,  they  ferv'd  up 

Melons,  Raifins,  Nectarines,  and  Figs;  then  every  one  had  his 

Commons  fet  before  him,  (like  a  Monk's  Mefs)  confifting  of 

a  Breft  of  Mutton  Roafted  in  the  firft  Service,  a  Partridge 

and  a  Pigeon  Roafted  in  the  fecond,  and  a  Rabbet  Pye  in  the 

third,  a  Fricaffee  of  Foul  in  the  fourth, 

*J  fort  of  Mujhrooms    *  Oronges  furrounded  with  little  Trouts 
red   on    the  upper  fide      of  the   b-        fg  q{  ^^  F{  [n  ^ 

and  yellow   underneath.  °  . 

fifth,  and   an  Appncock    1  art   in   the 

fixth:    And   after  all,  we  had  a  fort  of  Soupe  as  yellow  as 

the  Saffron  with  which  'twas  cram'd.     This,  Sir,  was  the  juft 

Bill  of  Fare  for  every  one's   Mefs.     In  the  mean  time,  we 

talk'd  of  nothing  but  the  French  Ladies.     The  Lady  alleg'd 

that  in  France,  the  great  Liberty  allow'd  to  the  Men  in  vifiting 

the  Ladies,  and  Playing  or  Walking  with  'em,  expos'd  the 

Wifeft  and  moft  Vertuous  Women  to  the  affronts  of  indifcreet 

and   detracting  Perfons,  who   to  make  themfelves  pafs  for 

Men  of  happy  Intrigues,  defame  the  Ladies  that  refift  'em. 

In  fine,  after  we  had  rail'd  againft  the  Husbands  that  tamely 

put  up  fuch  affronts,  inftead  of  refenting  'em,  we  rofe  from 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  729 

Table:  So  fhe  took  leave  after  the  ufual  way,  and  retir'd  to 
her  Chamber.  When  I  came  to  take  leave  of  the  Gentleman, 
he  walk'd  before  me  to  the  Head  of  the  Stairs,  where  he  ftop'd 
on  the  left  hand,  leaving  me  the  right  while  I  bid  him  Adieu. 
There  he  ftood  till  I  got  at  the  foot  of  the  Stairs,  upon  which 
he  gave  me  his  Hat  once  more,  and  fo  we  loft  fight  of  one 
another. 

[285]  I  thought  it  proper  to  give  you  the  Hiftory  of  this 
Adventure,  that  you  may  thereby  know  how  the  Spaniards  treat 
their  Friends.  If  a  hundred  Gentlemen  had  regal'd  me  at  fo 
many  feveral  times,  there  would  have  been  no  difference,  unlefs 
it  be  as  to  the  goodnefs  of  the  Cheer ;  for  the  Ceremony  is  the 
fame  in  one  Houfe  that  you  have  in  another.  So  that  by  this 
defcription,  you  know  all  that's  ufual  in  Spain  upon  fuch 
occafions.  I  believe  I  have  acquainted  you  that  the  Spani/k 
Women  look  upon  us  as  an  indifcreet  fort  of  People,  and  per- 
haps they  are  not  much  out  in  their  thoughts;  for  all  the 
Women  of  Europe  fpeak  of  us  at  the  fame  rate.  I'll  prefent 
you  with  fome  Spanijh  Verfes  that  a  foolifh  fort  of  a  Poet  made 
upon  that  Head  above  fifty  years  ago. 

Los  Difcretos  Efpanoles 
A  Los  Maridos  Zelozos 
Hazen  en  Callados  Gozos 
Orejus  de  Caracoles; 
No  fan  Tales  les  francezes 
Tanto  no  pueden  Cubrir 
Antes  Mas  quieren  Mil  Fezes. 
No  bazer  que  no  defir. 


730  Some  New  Voyages 

That  is  to  fay  in  good  Profe.  The  difcreet  Spaniards  ajfift  the 
Women  to  cuckold  their  Husbands  by  fecret  Imbraces ;  whereas  the 
French  can  conceal  nothing,  for  they'd  choofe  a  thoufand  times  rather 
to  be  without  the  Adventure,  than  not  to  /peak  of  it. 

This,  Sir,  is  much  of  a  piece  with  the  Argument  of  that 
Huron,  who  alledges  that  we  glory  in  requiting  a  Lady's  Favour 
with  a  piece  of  Ingratitude,  that  tarnifhes  her  Reputation  to 
all  intents  and  purpofes.  This  caution  may  teach  the  Women 
not  to  confide  in  rattle  brain'd  Fellows.  A  Woman  of  Senfe 
will  eafily  find  out  the  Character  [286]  of  a  Man,  when  fhe 
has  a  mind  to  give  her  felf  the  trouble  of  infpe&ing  his  con- 
duct. Tho'  our  young  Sparks  are  Fools,  yet  the  Ladies 
choose  'em  before  wifer  Men;  becaufe  Wifdom  do's  not  take 
place  till  Nature  begins  to  run  low. 

The  indifcreet  Tongue  of  a  young  Cavalier,  do's  a  con- 
fiderable  injury  to  his  Miftrifs :  But  at  the  fame  time,  your 
Chamber-Maids  and  Confidents,  are  not  lefs  guilty.  We  have 
frequent  inftances  of  Women  that  lofe  themfelves  by  neglect- 
ing a  due  Precaution  with  reference  to  their  Domefticks.  I 
call  that  Woman  a  Wife  Woman  that  knows  how  to  cover  her 
Folly  handfomely.  Now,  this  is  one  of  the  firft  Accomplifh- 
ments  of  your  Spanifh  Women,  who  by  that  means  oblige  their 
Husbands  very  much ;  for  tho'  the  Adventure  makes  the 
Cuckold,  'tis  the  Noife  that  makes  the  Horns.  With  this 
Lucky  Word  I  conclude  my  Letter,  intreating  you  would 
Write  to  me  to  Bilbao,  for  I  defign  to  go  thither  with  the  firft 
opportunity.     From  thence  I  intend  to  Sweep  (either  by  Sea 


to  Portugal  and  Denmark.  731 

or  Land)  along  the  Maritime  Coaft,  as  far  as  Portugal,  in  order 
to  view  the  Ports  and  Havens,  I  have  fo  often  heard  of.  I 
fhall  take  more  pleafure  in  that  difcovery,  than  in  feeing  the 
fineft  Cities  of  the  World:  And  thus  you  fee  there's  no  dif- 
puting  a  Man  out  of  his  relifh. 

I  am, 

SIR, 

Yours,  &c. 


[287]     A  Short 

DICTIONARY 

Of  the  moft  Univerfal 

LANGUAGE 

OF  THE 

SAVAGES. 


I  COULD  eafily  have  fent  you  a  compleat  Dictionary  of  all 
the  Savage  Words,  without  excepting  one,  and  of  feveral 
curious  Phrafes  :  But  I  confider'd  'twould  be  of  no  ufe  to  you, 
it  being  fufficient  to  fee  the  common  Words  that  are  every 
Moment  in  their  Mouths.  This  is  enough  for  any  Man  that 
defigns  for  Canada,  for  if  he  does  but  learn  in  his  Paffage 
thofe  I  have  fet  down,  he  will  be  able  to  Converfe  with  the 
Savages,  after  frequenting  their  Company  two  or  three 
Months. 

There  are  but  two  Mother  Tongues  in  the  whole  extent 


Algonkin  Language.  733 

of  Canada,  which  I  confine  within  the  Limits  of  MiJJifipi1 ;  but 
beyond  that  River  there's  an  infinity  of  other  Languages  that 
few  Europeans  could  yet  learn,  by  reafon  of  the  little  Corre- 
fpondence  they  have  with  the  Savages  of  thofe  Parts.  The 
two  Mother  Tongues  I  [288]  fpeak  of,  are  the  Huron  and  the 
Algonkin.  The  firft  is  underftood  by  the  Iroquefe,  for  the  dif- 
ference betwixt  the  Huron  and  the  Iroquefe  Language  is  not 
greater  than  that  between  the  Norman  and  the  French :  And 
fome  Savages  on  the  Confines  of  New  York  fpeak  a  Language 
that  is  very  near  the  fame.  The  Andafloguerons,  Torontogueron- 
ons,  Errieronons,  and  feveral  other  Savage  Nations  whom  the 
Iroquefe  have  totally  deftroy'd,  fpoke  likewife  the  fame  Tongue, 
and  underftood  one  another  perfectly  well.2  The  Second, 
namely  the  Algonkine,  is  as  muchefteem'd  among  the  Savages, 
as  the  Greek  and  Latin  is  in  Europe ;  tho'  'twould  feem  that 
the  Algonkins,  to  whom  it  owes  its  Original,  difgrace  it  by  the 
thinnefs  of  the  Nation,  for  their  whole  number  does  not  exceed 
two  Hundred. 


1  From  the  inception  of  their  endeavors  to  convert  the  American  tribes,  the  study 
of  Indian  linguistics  necessarily  occupied  much  attention  on  the  part  of  the  Jesuit  mis- 
sionaries of  New  France.  Their  narratives  abound  in  descriptions  of  the  native 
tongues,  and  the  difficulties  connected  with  acquiring  them.  They  early  recognized 
as  the  fundamental  basis  of  their  studies,  the  two  stocks  which  Lahontan  here  describes. 
Different  fathers  devoted  themselves  to  researches  and  compilations  in  each  division  of 
the  great  task.  Brebeuf  and  Le  Jeune,  in  particular,  were  authorities  upon  the  Huron- 
Iroquois  ;  Andre,  upon  the  Algonquian  tongue.  In  1653  it  was  declared  in  the 
Relations  that  grammars  and  dictionaries  were  available  for  both  of  these  linguistic 
types  —  Jes.  Rel.,  xxxix,  p.  121.  How  far  Lahontan  was  indebted  to  the  Jesuits  for 
his  knowledge,  and  how  far  it  was  based  solely  on  personal  contact  with  the  aborigines, 
is  not  clearly  to  be  determined.  His  facility  in  the  languages  of  the  savages  is  evident 
throughout  his  narrative.  —  Ed. 

2  For  these  tribes,  see  p.  320,  note  1,  ante.  —  Ed. 


734  <A  Dictionary  of  the 

You  muft  know  that  all  the  Languages  of  Canada,  except- 
ing the  Huron  and  thofe  which  retain  to  it,  come  as  near  to 
the  Algonkine,  as  the  Italian  to  the  Spanijh ;  and  'tis  for  that 
reafon  that  all  the  Warriours  and  ancient  Counfellors  of  fo 
many  different  Nations  affect  to  fpeak  it  with  all  manner  of 
nicety.  'Tis  fo  neceffary  to  Travellers  in  that  Country,  that 
in  fpeaking  it  one  is  certain  of  making  himfelf  to  be  under- 
ftood  by  all  forts  of  Savages  in  whatfoever  place  he  comes  to, 
whether  in  Acadia  or  Hudfon's  Bay,  or  upon  the  Lakes,  or 
even  among  the  Iroquefe,  among  whom  a  great  many  have 
learn'd  it  for  Reafons  of  State,  notwithstanding  that  it  differs 
from  theirs  more  widely  than  Night  from  Day.1 

The  Algonkine  Language  has  neither  Tone  nor  Accent,  nor 
fuperfluous  dead  Letters ;  fo  that  'tis  as  eafie  to  pronounce  it 
as  to  write  it.  'Tis  not  Copious,  no  more  than  the  other 
Languages  of  America;  for  the  People  of  that  Continent  are 
[289]  Strangers  to  Arts  and  Sciences,  they  are  unacquainted 
with  the  Laws  of  Ceremony  and  Complement,  and  an  infinity 
of  Words  that  the  Europeans  ufe  to  imbellifh  their  Difcourfe. 
Their  Speech  is  only  adapted  to  the  Neceffities  and  Conven- 
iences of  Life,  and  there  is  not  one  ufelefs  or  fuperfluous  Word 
in  the  whole  Language.  Farther,  this  Tongue  makes  no  ufe 
either  of  F  or  V  Confonant.2 


1  On  the  widespread  utility  of  the  Algonquian  language,  especially  in  its  Chippewa 
form,  which  is  considered  the  oldest  and  purest,  see  "J.  Long's  Voyages,"  in 
Thwaites,  Early  Western  Travels,  ii,  pp.  28-30.  —  Ed. 

2  For  the  Algonquian  tongue,  and  the  early  studies  thereof  by  English  colonists, 
see  the  works  of  John  Eliot,  Roger  Williams,  and  Jonathan  Edwards  as  indicated  in 
Pilling,  Bibliography  of  the  Algonquian  Languages  (Washington,  1891).  —  Ed. 


Algonkin  Language.  735 

To  the  end  of  the  Dictionary  I  have  added  the  four  Tenfes 
of  the  Indicative  of  the  Verb,  /  love.  The  Indicative  is  form'd 
from  the  Infinitive,  by  adding  the  Perfonal  Note  ni,  which 
fignifies  me  or  /.  Thus,  Sakia  fignifies  to  love,  and  Nifakia,  I 
love.     The  fame  is  the  cafe  with  all  the  other  Verbs. 

'Tis  an  eafie  matter  to  conjugate  the  Verbs  of  this  Lan- 
guage after  one  has  learn'd  the  Prefent  Tenfe  of  the  Indicative 
Mood.  To  the  Imperfect  Tenfe  they  add  Ban,  as  Sakiaban, 
I  lov'd ;  to  the  Perfect  Tenfe  they  add  ki  after  the  perfonal 
mark,  as  ni  kifakia,  I  have  lov'd,  and  to  the  Future  ga  in  like 
manner,  as  nigafakia  or  nin  gafakia,  I  /hall  love.  All  the  other 
Tenfes  of  the  Verb  are  form'd  from  the  Prefent  of  the  Indica- 
tive, for  Example,  Ningafakiaban,  I  would  love,  Ninkifakiaban,  I 
jhonld  have  lov'd.  In  a  Word,  when  the  Prefent  of  the  Indica- 
tive, and  the  additional  Particles  for  the  other  Tenfes,  are 
once  known,  the  whole  Language  may  be  learn'd  in  a  very 
little  time.  As  for  the  Imperative  'tis  form'd  by  prefixing  A 
to  the  Infinitive,  as  Afakia,  love  thou,  and  the  Plural,  let  us  love, 
is  form'd  by  fubjoyning  Ta  to  the  Infinitive,  as  Sakiata,  let  us 
love.     It  remains  only  to  fhew  the  Perfonal  Notes,  viz. 

[290]  I  or  Me,  Nir,  You,  Kiraoua. 

Thee  or  Thou,  Kir,  You  and  We,  Kiraoueint. 

He  or  Him,  Ouir.  They  or  Them,  Ouiraoua. 
We,  Niraoueint. 


736 


A  Dictionary  of  the 


A  Bandon  or  forfake,  I  aban- 
don,  Packitan. 
Above,  Spimink. 
Admirable,  'tis  admirable  (the 

Savages  fpeak  it  by  way  of 

Derifion)  Pilaoua. 
Afterwards,  Mipidach. 
All,  Kakina. 
All  of  'em,  Miffoute. 
All  in  all,  Aloucb  bogo. 
Always,  Kakeli. 
Amifs,  that's  amifs,  'tis  good 

for  nothing,  Napitcb  Mal- 

atat. 
And,  Gaye  or  Mipigaye. 
Arrive,  I  arrive,  Takonchin. 
Afhes,  Powder,  Duft,  Pingoe. 
Affift  or  Aid,  Maouineoua. 
Ax,  a  great  Ax,  Agackouet. 
A  little  Ax,  Agackonetons. 

B 

T>Ag,  a  Tobacco  bag,  Caf- 

*-*  pitagan. 
Ball,  Alouin. 
Barrel,  Aoyentagan. 


Beat,  I  beat,  Packite. 

A  Bear,  Mackoua. 

A  little  Bear,  Makons. 

Beard,  Mifcbiton. 

Beaver,  the  Animal,  Amik. 

Beaver-Skin,  Apiminikoue. 

to  Be  or  reft,  Tapia. 

Becaufe,  Miouincb. 

to  Believe,  Tilerima. 

Belly,  Mifcbimout. 

Black,  Markate. 

Blood,  Mifcoue. 

Body,  Tao 

Bottle,  Chicbigoue. 

Brother,  Nicanicb. 

Brandy,  the  juice  or  Broth  of 
Fire,  Scoutiouabou. 

Brave  Soldier,  Simaganis. 

Bread,  Pa-boucbikan. 

Brech,  Mifcoafab. 

[291]  Breeches,  a  circumlocu- 
tion for  the  covering  of  the 
Brech,  Kipokitie  Koafab. 

Broth  or  Juice,  Ouabou. 

Buck,  Ouaskecb. 

Buckler,  Pakakoa. 

Build,  to  build  Veffels  or  Ca- 
nous,  Chimanike, 


Algonkin  Language. 


737 


D 


/^All,  to  call  or  name,  Tichi- 
^-^  nika. 

Candle,  to  muff  the  Candle, 
to  ftir  up  the  Fire,  Ouafa- 
colendamaoua. 

Canou,  Cbiman. 

Captain,  Leader,  Okima. 

to  Carry,  Pitou  or  Pita. 

Caldron,  Akik. 

Change,  I  change,  Mifcoutcb. 

Child,  little  Children,  Bobi- 
loucbins. 

Coat,  Capotiouian. 

Cold,  I  am  cold,  Kikatcb. 

Come  on,  Mappe. 

to  Come,  Pimatcba. 

Comrade,  at  my  Com- 
rade's Houfe,  Nitcbe,  Nit- 
chikoue. 

Concern'd  or  difquieted,  Tal- 
imijfi. 

Corn,  Malomin. 

Covering,  a  white  Woollen 
Covering,  Ouabioidan. 

Country,  Endalakian. 

Courage,  I  have  Courage, 
Tagonamijfi. 

C  *  Maskimout. 

Cup  made  of  Bark,  Oula- 
gan. 

47 


A 


Dab,  Malamek. 
Dance,  I  dance,  Nimi. 
Dance  of  the  Savages  to  the 

Sound   of   Gourds,  Chicbi- 

koue. 
Dart,  I  dart,  Patchipaoua. 
Day,  to  day,  Ningom. 
One  day,  Okonogat. 
Dead,  Nipouin. 
Devil,     Evil     Spirit,    Matchi 

Manitou. 
Die,  I  die,  Nip. 
Dim  of   Maple  Wood,  Soule 

Mickoan. 
Dog,  Alim. 
Little  Dog,  Alimons. 
Do,  I  do,  Tocbiton. 
Done,  'tis  done,  Chaye. 
Doubtlefs,  Antetatouba. 
Drefs  Meat :  I  do  the  Kettle, 

(a  Phrafe)  Poutaoue. 
Drink,  I  drink,  Minikone. 
Drunken,  a  Fool,  Oufkouebi. 
Duck,  Chichip. 


[292]  E 


E 


Ach  or  every  one,  Pepegik. 
Earth,  Acke  or  Ackouin. 


738 


A  Dictionary  of  the 


to  Eat,  Ouijfin. 
Elfewhere,  Coutadibi. 
Englifh,  Ouatfakamink,  Dach- 

irini. 
Enough,  'tis  enough,  Mimilic. 
Equal   or   like   one   another, 

Tabifcoutch. 
Efteem,  I  efteem  or  honour, 

Napitelitna. 
Eyes,  Ouskinchic. 


£  All,  to  fall,  Pankifin. 

Far  off,  Ouatfa. 

Faft,  to  go  faft,  Ouelibick. 

Fat,  Pimite. 

Father,  my  Father,  Noufce. 

Fatigued,  I  am  fatigu'd,  Tak- 

oujfi. 
Few  or  little,  Me  Mangis. 
Fields  fown,  Kitteganink. 
to  Find,  Nantouneoua. 
Fire,  Scoute. 
to  ftrike   Fire  with  a   Stone, 

Scoutecke. 
Firelock,  Scoutekan. 
Fish,  Kikons. 
White  Fifh,  Attikamec. 
Fork,  Naffaouakouat. 
Formerly,  Piraouigo. 
Fort  or  Fortrefs,  Ouackaigan. 


Fortify,  I  make  Forts,  Onac- 

kaike. 
Forwards  in  the  Wood,  Nope- 

menk. 
A  Fowl,  Pile. 
France,   the   Country   of   the 

French,  Mittigouchiouek,  En- 

dalakiank. 
The  French,  term'd   Builders 

of  Ships,  Mittigouch. 
to  Freeze,  Kiffin. 
It  freezes  hard,  Kiffina  Magat. 
Full,  Mouskinet. 
Fufee,  Paskifigan. 


VJlrle,  Ickoueffens. 

Give,  I  give,  Mila. 

Glafs,  a  Looking-glafs,  Oua- 
bemo. 

Go  by  Water,  Pimifca. 

God  of  Heaven,  Mafter  of 
Life ;  Great  Spirit ;  the  un- 
known Being,  Kitchimanitou. 

Good,  Kouelatch. 

Govern,  I  Govern,  Tiberima. 

[293]  Governor  General  of 
Canada,  Kitchiokimafi  magan- 
ich,  i.  e.  great  Captain  of 
War. 

Grape,  Choemin. 


Algonkin  Language. 


739 


Great   in  the  way  of  Merit, 
Valour,  Courage,  &c.  Kitchi. 
Great  in  Stature,  Mentitou. 
Greedy,  Safakijfi. 
Gut,  Olabicb. 


H 


H 


.Air,  Liffis. 
Hair  of  Beafts  Piouel. 
Half,  Nabal. 

Handfome,  Proper,  Safega. 
Hare,  Ouapous. 
Hart,  Micbeoue. 
Hate,  I  Abhor,  Chinguerima. 
Have,  to  have,  Tindala. 
Head,  Onfticouan. 
Heaven,    the    upper    Earth, 

Spiminkakouin. 
Herb,  Mijask. 

Here,  Achonda  or  Achomanda. 
Hidden,  Kimouch. 
Home,  at  my  Houfe,  Entayant. 
To  Honour,  Mackaouala. 
Hot,  Akichatte. 
How,  Taut. 
How  many,  Tanfou,  or  Tani- 

milik. 
Hungry,  I  am  hungry,  Packate. 
Hunt,  I  hunt,  Kiouffe. 
Hurons,  the  People,  Nadouck. 
Hut,  Ouikiouam. 


I. 

TEfuit,  Black  Gown,  Mackate 
•*     ockola. 
Ifland,  Minis. 
Immediately,  Ouibatcb. 
Impoftor,  Malatifli. 
Indian  Corn,  Mittamin. 
Intirely,  Napitcb. 
Iron,  Piouabick. 

Iroquefe,  in  the  Plural  Num- 
ber, Matcbinadoaek. 


K. 


K, 


-Eep,  I  keep,  Ganaouerima. 
Kettle,  Akikons. 
King    of   France,    the    Great 

Head  of  the  French,  Mitti- 

goucb  Kitchi  Okima. 
Knife,  Mockoman. 
A  Crooked  Knife,  Coutagan. 
[294]  Know,  I  know yKikerima. 
To  know,  Kikerindan. 

L. 

Ake,   great  Lake,  Kitchi- 
*~^  gamink. 
Lame,  KakikatL 
Land  Carriage,  Cappatagan. 
To  Laugh,  Papi. 
Lazy,  Kittimi. 


74Q 


A  Dictionary  of  the 


To  Leave,  Packitan  : 
Letter,  Maftgnaygan. 
Liberal,  Oualatijji. 
Life,  Nouchimonin. 
Light,  fplendor,  Venclao. 
Little,  Ouabiloucheins. 
To  Live,  Noutchimou. 
Long    fince,    'tis    long    ago, 

CbachayL 
Lofe  at  play,  I  lofe,  Packilague. 
Love,  to  love,  Sakia. 
To  ly  down,  Ouipema. 


M 


M. 


.Ale,  Nape. 
Malicious,  cheating,  one  that 

has  an  111  Heart,  Malatcbi- 

tehe. 
Man,  Alifinape. 
March,  I  march,  Pimouffe. 
Marry,    I    take    a    Woman, 

Ouiouin. 
Marryed  Man,  Ndpema. 
Meat,  Oiiias. 
A  Med'cine,  or  Potion,  Mas- 

kikik. 
To  meet  Nantouneoua. 
Merchandize  Goods,  Alokat- 

c  big  an. 
Miftrefs,  or  She-Friend,  Niri- 

moufens. 


Moon,  the  Star  of  the  Night, 
Debikat  Ikizis. 

to  Morrow,  Ouabank. 

The  Day  after  to  Morrow, 
Oufouabank. 

A  Mortar  of  Wood  for  beat- 
ing Indian  Corn,  Poutagan. 

Much,  Nibila. 


N 


N. 


Ations,  People,  Irini. 
Near,  Pechouetch. 
Needle,  a  fewing  Needle,  Cha- 

bonikan. 
Never,  Kaouicka. 
News,  Tepatcbimou-kan. 
I  bring  News,  Tepatchimou. 
Night,  Debikat. 
No,  Ka. 

No  body,  Kagouetcb  or  Kaouia. 
Nofe,  Tach : 
Not    at    all,    Kamamenda    or 

Kagouetcb. 
Not  yet,  Ka  mafcbi. 
Nothing,  Kakegou. 


o 


[295]       O 


FAR,  Appoue. 
Old,  Kioucheins. 
One-Eyed,  Paskingoe. 


Algonkin  Language. 


74i 


Original,  Elk,  Mons. 
A  young  and  little  Elk,  Man- 
ichie  h. 
Other,  Coutac. 
Otter,  Nikik. 


OAP,   or   the   juice   of  the 
A     Meal  of  Indian  Corn,  Mit- 

aminabou. 
Part,  in  what  part,  Tanipi. 
Partridges,  Pilefmie. 
Pay,  I  pay,  Tipaham. 
Peace,  Peca. 

to  make  Peace,  Pecatechi. 
Peninfula,  Minijfin. 
Perfuafion,  Tirerigan. 
Pike,  Fifh,  Kinonge. 
Pipe,  Calumet,  Poagan. 
to  Pifs,  Minfi. 

Pity,  to  take  pity,  Chaouerima. 
to  Play,  Packigoue. 
to  Pleafe  one,  I  pleafe,  Marou- 

erindan. 
Porcelain  Beads,  Aonies. 
Powder,  Gunpowder,  Pingoe, 

Mackate. 
To  pour  out,  Sibikinan. 
To  pray  to  God,  Talamia  Kit- 

cbimanitou. 


Prefent,  at  prefent,  Nougam. 

Prefently,  Ouibatch. 

Petty,  Olichichin. 

P*,  Patch  agon. 

Proper,  Handfome,  Safega. 

to  Purfue,  Nopinala. 

I  put  away  (a  term  ufed  for 

a  Man's  putting  away  his 

Wife)  Ouebinan. 


0 


Q. 

Uickly,  Kegatcb. 


R 


JtVAin,  Kimiouan. 

Red  Colour,  Mifcoue. 

Red  Powder,  efteemed  by  the 

Savages  Oulaman. 
to  Regard,  Ouabemo. 
to  Regrate,  Kouiloma. 
Relation,  Kinfman,  Taouema. 
Refolve,    I     refolve,     Tibelin- 

dan. 
to  Refpedl,  Tabamica. 
to    Reft   or    Repofe,    Chinki- 

chin. 
Right,    to    be    in    the   right, 

Tepoa. 
A  Ring,  Dibilincbibifon. 


742 


A  Dictionary  of  the 


River,  Sipitn. 

Robe,  Ockola. 

Root,  Ouftikoues. 

Row,  to  row,  Tapoue. 

to  Run,  Pitchibat. 

Run  to,  I  run  to,  Pitchiba. 


[296]       S 

OAble,  Negao. 

Sack,  Maskimout. 

Sad,  to  be  fad,  Talimijfi. 

Sail,  I  fail,  Pimifca. 

to  Salute,  Mackaouala. 

Say,  I  fay,  Tila. 

He  fays,  fays  he,  (a  very  ufual 
Word)  Yoaa. 

Sea,  a  great  Lake  without  lim- 
its, Agankitchigamink. 

To  fee,  Ouabemo. 

Seek,  I  feek,  Nantaouerima. 

Senfe,  to  have  fenfe,  Nabou- 
acka. 

Ship,  or  Great  Canow,  Kitchi 
Chiman. 

Shirt,  Papakiouian. 

Shooes,  Mackifin. 

Sick,  Outineous. 

Side,  on  the  other  fide,  Gaa- 
mink. 


Since,  Mipidach. 

To  fing,  Chichin. 

Skin,  Pachikin. 

Slave,  Ouackan. 

Sleep,  Nipa. 

Smoak,  I  fmoak  Tobacco,  Pen- 

takoe. 
To  make  a  Smoak,  Sagaffoa. 
Softly,  Peccabogo. 
Sons,  Nitiani. 
Sorry,  I  am  forry,  Iskatiffi. 
Soldier,  Simaganich 
To  Speak,  Galoula. 
Spirit,  an  Intelligent  Invifible 

Being,  Manitou. 
Spoon,  Mickouan. 
Spring-time,  Mirockamink. 
Star,  Alank. 
To  fteal,  Kimoutin. 
Stockins,  Hofe,  Mitas, 
Stone,  Aflin. 
Strong,    firm,    hard,    Mafcb- 

kaoua. 
A  Strong-man,  Machkaoaejfi. 
Very  ftrong,  Magat. 
Sturgeon,  Fifh,  Lamek. 
Sun,  Kifis. 

Sweat,  to  fweat,  Matoutou. 
Sword,  Simagan. 
Surprifing,  'tis   furprifing   or 

wonderful,  EtteouL 


Algonkin  Language. 


743 


T. 

X  Obacco,  Sema. 
Take,  I  take,  Takouan. 
Take  hold,  Emanda. 
Teeth,  Tibit. 
That,  Maba. 

There,  that  way,  Mandadibi. 
There,  at  a  diftance,   Ouatfa- 

dibi. 
[297]  To  Think  or  entertain 

an  Opinion,  Tilelindan. 
This,  Manda. 
This  way,  Undach . 
On  this  fide,  Undachdibi. 
Time,  along  time  ago,  Chach- 

aye,  Piraouigo. 
Together,  Mamaoue. 
Tongue,  Outan. 
Too  Little,  Offame  Mangis. 
Too  much,  Offani. 
To  Truck  Tataouan. 
Truly  Keket. 
A  Turtle-Dove,  Mimi. 
Tyr'd,  I  am  tyr'd,  Takonfi. 


W. 


w. 


Alk,  I  walk,  Tija. 
Value,  it  is  a  valuable  Thing, 
Arimat. 


Water,  Nibi. 

War,  Nantobali. 

To  make  War,  Nantoubalima. 

Warriors,  Nantobalitchick. 

Way,  or  Road,  Mickan. 

Well,  that  is  well,  Oiieoiielim. 

Well,  well,  what  then  ?  Achin- 

dach . 
Well  then,  Taninentien. 
What's  that  ?  Ouaneouine. 
What  has  he?  Kekouanen. 
Whence,  Tanipi. 
Whence    come    ye?     Tanipi 

Endayenk. 
Where?  Ta. 

Where  is  he  ?  Tanipi  Api. 
While,  Megaotcb. 
White,  Ouabi. 
Whither   do  you  go  ?    Taga 

Kitiga. 
Who's  that?  Ouaneouine  maba. 
Why?  Tanientien. 
Wicked,   in  fpeaking  of   the 

Iroquefe,  Malataffi. 
Will,  Ouifcb. 
Village,  Oudenanc. 
Win  at  play,  I  win,  Packitan. 
Wind,  Loutin. 
Wine,  the  Juice  or  Broath  of 

Grapes,  Choeminabou. 
Vifit,  to  pay  a  Vifit,  Piametiffa. 


744 


A  Dictionary  of  the 


Winter,  Pipoun. 

I  Winter,  or  pafs  the  Winter, 

Pipounichi. 
To  underftand,  Nifitotaoua. 
Wolf,  Mahingan. 
Woman,  Ickoue. 
Wood  for  Firing,  Mittik, 
Write,  I  write,  Mafinaike. 


Y. 

JL  Ellow,  Ouzao. 
Yes,  Mi,  or  Mincouti. 
Yes,  indeed,  Ante,  or  Sankema. 
Yefterday,  Pitchilago. 
Yet,  Minaonatch. 
Young,  Ouskinekiffi. 


[298]  I  fhall  here  content  my  felf  in  giving  you  the  four 
Tenfes  of  the  Indicative  Mood  of  one  Verb  ;  by  a  view  of  which 
you  may  form  the  Conjugation  of  the  other  Moods.  'Twere 
eafy  to  inlarge  upon  this  Subject ;  but  if  I  offer'd  to  launch 
out,  the  multiplicity  of  things  that  fall  in  the  way,  would  oblige 
me  to  Write  a  formal  Grammar. 


To  love,  Sakia. 

Prefent 
I  love,  Nifakia. 
Thou  loveft,  Kifakia. 
He  loves,  On  fakia. 
We  love,  Ni  fakiamin. 
Ye  love,  Kifakiaoua. 
We  and  you  love,  Kifakiamin- 

aoua. 
They  love,  Sakiaouak. 

Imperfect. 
I  loved,  Ni  fakiaban. 
Thou  lovd'ft,  Ki  fakiaban. 


He  lov'd,  On  fakiaban. 
We  lov'd,  Ni  faikaiminaban. 
You  lov'd,  Ki  fakiaouaban. 
We  and  you  lov'd,  Kifakimin- 

aouaban. 
They  lov'd,  Sakiabanik. 

I  have  lov'd,  Ni  kifakia. 
Thou  haft  lov'd,  Ki  kifakia. 
He  has  lov'd,  Ou  kifakia. 
We  have  lov'd,  Ni  kifakiamin. 
You  have  lov'd,  Ki  kifakiaoua. 
We  and  you  have  lov'd,  Ki 

kifakiaminaoua. 
They  have  lov'd,  Kifakiaouak. 


Algonkin  Language. 


745 


I  fhall  love,  Ningafakia. 
Thou  fhalt  love,  Ki  gafakia. 
He  fhall  love,  On  gafakia. 
We  fhall  love,  Nin  gafakiamin. 
You  fhall  love,  Ki  gafakiaoua. 


We   and   you   fhall    love,   Ki 

gafakiaminaoua. 
They  fhall  love,  Gafakiaouak. 
Love  thou,  Afakia. 
Let  us  love,  Afakiata. 


As  for  the  Nouns  they  are  not  declin'd  at  all.  The  plural 
number  is  form'd  by  a  k.  added  to  a  fingular,  ending  in  a 
Vowel,  as  Alifinape  fignifies  a  Man,  and  Alifinapek  feveral  Men. 
If  the  Noun  [299]  ends  with  a  Confonant,  the  plural  is  form'd 
by  the  addition  of  ik  ;  as  Minis  fignifies  an  Ifle,  and  Minijfik 
Ifles  ;  Paskifigan  a  Fufee,  and  Pafkifiganik  a  plurality  of  Fufees. 


The  Algonkin  way  of  Counting. 


/^Ne,  Pegik. 

^  Two,  Nincb. 

Three,  Nijfoue. 

Four,  Neou. 

Five,  Naran. 

Six,  Ningoutouaffou. 

Seven,  Ninchouaffou. 

Eight,  Niffouaffou. 

Nine,  Changaffou. 

Ten,  Mittaffou. 

Eleven,  Mittaffou  achi  pegik. 

Twelve,  Mitajfou  achi  ninch. 

Thirteen,  Mitajfou  achi  nijfoue. 

Fourteen,  Mitajfou  achi  neou. 

Fifteen,  Mitajfou  achi  naran. 


Sixteen,  Mitajfou  achi  ningotou- 

ajfou. 
Seventeen,  Mitajfou  achi   nin- 

choaffou. 
Eighteen,  Mitaffou  achi  niffou- 

affou. 
Nineteen,  Mitaffou  achi  chang- 

affou. 
Twenty,  Ninchtana. 
Twenty  one,   Ninchtana    achi 

pegik. 
Twenty  two,  Ninchtana   achi 

ninch. 
Twenty  three,   Nichtana   achi 

nijfoue. 


746  A  Dictionary  of  the 

Twenty  four,  Ninchtana  achi  Thirty,  Niffouemitana. 

neou.  Thirty  one,  Niffouemitana  achi 
Twenty  five,   Ninchtana    achi         pegik,  &c. 

naran.  Fourty,  Neoumitana. 

Twenty    fix,    Ninchtana    achi  Fifty,  Naran  mitana. 

ningotouaffou.  Sixty,  Ningoutouaffou  mitana. 

Twenty  feven,  Ninchtana  achi  Seventy,  Ninchouaffou  mitana. 

ninchoaffou.  Eighty,  Niffouaffou  mitana. 

Twenty  eight,  Ninchtana  achi  Ninety,  Changaffou  mitana. 

niffouaffou.  A  hundred,  Mitaffou  mitana. 

Twenty  nine,  Ninchtana  achi  A  thoufand,  Mitaffou  mitaffou 

changaffou.  mitana. 

[300]  If  you  can  once  count  to  a  hundred,  'tis  eafy  to 
count  by  tens  from  a  thoufand  to  a  hundred  thoufand,  which 
number  is  in  a  manner  unknown  to  the  Savages,  and  by  con- 
fequence  not  us'd  in  their  Language. 

You  muft  take  care  to  pronounce  fully  all  the  letters  of 
the  Words,  and  to  reft  upon  the  J's  that  come  at  the  end. 
The  pronunciation  is  very  eafy,  becaufe  this  Language  has  no 
Guttural  or  Palate  Letters,  fuch  as  the  Spani/h  J  Confonant 
with  their  G  and  their  H,  as  well  as  the  Engli/h  th,  which  puts 
a  Foreigner's  Tongue  upon  the  rack. 

I  can't  pafs  by  one  curious  Remark  touching  the  Language 
of  the  Hurons  and  the  Iroquefe;  namely,  that  it  do's  not  ufe  the 
Labial  Letters,  viz.  b,  f,  m,  p.  And  yet  the  Huron's  Language 
appears  to  be  very  pretty,  and  founds  admirably  well,  notwith- 
ftanding  that  the  Hurons  never  (hut  their  Lips  when  they  fpeak. 
Commonly  the  Iroquefe  make  ufe  of  it  in  their  Harangues 
and  Councils,  when  they  enter  upon  a  Negotiation  with  the 


Algonkin  Language,  y^rj 

French  or  Englijh.     But  in  their  Domeftick  Interviews  they 
fpeak  their  Mother  Tongue. 

None  of  the  Savages  of  Canada  care  to  fpeak  French,  unlefs 
they  are  perfuaded  that  the  force  of  their  Words  will  be  per- 
fectly underftood.  They  muft  be  very  well  fatisfied  upon  that 
Head  before  they  venture  to  expofe  themfelves  in  fpeaking 
their  mind  in  French;  abating  for  fome  cafes  of  neceflity,  when 
they  are  in  Company  with  the  Coureurs  de  Bois  that  do  not 
underftand  their  Language. 

To  return  to  the  Huron  Language ;  we  muft  confider  that 
fince  neither  the  Hurons  nor  the  Iroquefe  ufe  the  Labial  Letters, 
'tis  impoflible  for  [301]  either  of  'em  to  learn  French  well.  I 
have  fpent  four  days  in  trying  to  make  the  Hurons  pronounce 
the  Labial  Letters,  but  I  could  not  accomplifh  it ;  nay,  I  am  of 
the  Opinion  that  in  ten  years  time  they  would  not  learn  to 
pronounce  thefe  Words,  Bon,  Fits,  Monfieur,  Ponchartrain :  For 
inftead  of  Bon  they'd  fay  Ouon;  inftead  of  Fils,  Rils;  inftead  of 
Monfieur,  Caounfieur ;  and  in  the  room  of  Ponchartrain,  Con- 
char  train. 

I  have  here  added  fome  Words  of  the  Huron  Language, 
that  your  curiofity  may  be  gratified  with  a  view  of  the  differ- 
ence between  that  and  the  Algonkin.  The  Hurons  fpeak  with 
a  great  deal  of  gravity,  and  almoft  all  their  Words  have  afpir- 
ations,  the  H  being  pronounc'd  as  ftrong  as  poflible. 

I  do  not  know  that  the  Letter  F  is  usd  in  any  of  the  Sav- 
age Languages.  'Tis  true,  the  Effanapes  and  the  Gnacfitares 
have  it ;  but  they  are  Seated  upon  the  long  River  beyond  the 
MiJJifipi,  and  confequently  out  of  the  Limits  of  Canada. 


748 


A  Dictionary 


Some  Huron  Words. 


HpO    be    a    Man   of   Senfe, 
•**-     Hondioun. 
Spirit,  Divinity,  Ocki. 
Fire,  Tfifta. 
Iron,  Aouifta. 
Woman,  Ontehtian. 
Fufee,  Ouraouenta. 
To  be  forry,  Oungaroun. 
'Tis  cold,  Outoirha. 
Fat,  Skoueton. 
Man,  Onnonhoue. 
Yefterday,  Hiorheha. 
Jefuit,  Tfiftatfu 
Far,  Deheren. 
Otter,  Taouinet. 
Not,  Staa. 
Yes,  Endae. 
Pipe    or    Calumet,     Gannon- 

daoua. 
Near,  Touskeinbia. 
Soldiers,  Skenraguette. 
To  Salute,  Igonoron. 
Shooes,  Arrachiou. 
Traffick,  Attendinon. 
Altogether,  Tiaoundi. 
All  of  'em,  Aouetti. 
Tobacco,  Oyngoua. 


'Tis  valuable,  difficult,  [302] 
and  of  importance,  Gan- 
noron. 

To  be  gone,  Saraskoua. 

Covetous,  Onnonfte. 

Handfome,   Proper,  Akouafti. 

Very  much,  Atoronton. 

That's  well,  Andeya. 

I  Drink,  Ahirrha. 

Indian  Corn,  Onneha. 

Stockins,  Arrhich. 

A  Bottle,  Gat/eta. 

A  brave  Man,  Songuitehe. 

'Tis  done,  Houna. 

My  Brother,  Tatfi. 

My  Comrade,  Tonaro. 

Heaven,  Toendi. 

A  Hutt,  Honnonchia. 

Hair,  Eonhora. 

Captain,  Otcon. 

Dog,  Agnienon. 

Softly,  Skenonha. 

Peace,  Skenon. 

I  fay,  Altatia. 

To  morrow,  Achetek. 

To  be,  Sackie. 


INDEX 


INDEX 


ABE 

Abenaki  Indians,  significance  of  name, 
328;  habitat,  xxviii,  327,  328;  lan- 
guage, 339;  migrations,  90,  327, 
328,  330;  tribe  of,  90,  328;  French 
allies,  328;  St.  Castin  among,  328, 
329;  missions  for,  46—49,  328—330, 
339,  340;  give  tidings  of  English 
fleet,  242;  present  numbers,  328; 
characterized,  339;sketch,  327,  328. 

Abies  canadensis,  371. 

Abittibi  (Tabitibi)  Indians,  habitat,  342; 
language,  3425  characterized,  342; 
sketch,  342. 

Acadia,  climate,  325,  326;  part  of 
Canada,  302;  boundaries,  236,  323, 
324;  coast,  323,  324;  described,  323 
-327;  early  grant  of,  331;  Indians, 
90,  327,  328,  339,  399,  414,  734; 
settlement,  324,  326,  331;  popula- 
tion, 330;  capital,  330,  331;  in  La- 
hontan's  lieutenancy,  xxx,  281;  gov- 
ernors of,  52,  53,  237,  288,  326, 
327,  332;  French  officers  in,  224, 
236,  237;  English  in,  69,  227,  326; 
projected  attack  on,  274;  fisheries, 
324-326;  fur-trade,  327,  328;  mis- 
sions, 329,  330;  agriculture,  325; 
visited  by  bishop,  232. 

Acadiensis,  330. 

Acipenser  rubicundus,  156. 

Achirigouan  Indians,  habitat,  342;  lan- 
guage, 342;  characterized,  342; 
sketch,  342. 

Adario  (Kondiaronk,  The  Rat),  Huron 
chief,  characterized,  xlviii,  220,  242; 
Denonville  attempts  to  punish,  209, 
220;  French  ally,  220;  relations  with 
Frontenac,  149;  at  Fort  Frontenac, 
220,    221;    relations  with   Iroquois, 


AMM 

Adario  {continued). 

xxii,  149,  165,  220-225,  237>  23&, 
508;  opposed  to  war,  495,  496;  friend 
of  Lahontan,  xxii,  9,  165;  Dialogue 
with  Lahontan,  xiv,  lxi,  7,  8,  517- 
618;  arguments,  442,  443;  quoted, 
xliv,  xlvi,  495,  496;  wife,  46 i;  fun- 
eral, 149;  sketch,  149. 

Adders,  in  Canada,  352,  357. 

Africans,  characteristics  of,  282,  284. 

Agnies  Indians.     See  Mohawk  Indians. 

Akansas  Indians.    See  Arkansa  Indians. 

Akouessan.      See  Longueuil. 

Albany  (N.  Y.),  location,  7;  raids  near, 
240,  262. 

Alders,  in  Canada,  365. 

Algonkin  Indians,  habitat,  47,  50,  51; 
vocabulary  of  language,  733-748; 
numbers,  733;  allied  with  French, 
51;  conduct  French  to  Iroquois 
country,  81,  82;  Lahontan  hunts 
with,  46,  47,  88,  89;  mission  for, 
49;  sketch,  51. 

Algonquian  family,  tribes  of,  xl,  47,  77, 
82,  90,  168,  174,  175.  218,  309, 
3*7,  327,  340,  343>  398>  original 
tribe  of,  342;  language,  47,  176, 
297.  339>  342>  733.  7 34 > vocabulary, 
297,736-748;  name  for  governor  of 
Canada,  97,  404;  religious  ideas  of, 

435- 
Alligator  mississippiensis,  347. 
Allouez,  Father  Claude,  founds  Green 

Bay  mission,  168;  monument  to,  168; 

mentions  wild  rice,  175;  cited,  494. 
American  Naturalist,  200. 
Amherstburg  (Ont.),  Indian  reservation 

near,  155. 
Ammunition,  Canadian  import,  376. 


752 


Index 


AMO 
Amours,  Genevieve  d',  affair  with  La- 
hontan,  xxvii,  xxviii,  388-390;  mar- 
riage,   391;    god-daughter  of  Fron- 
tenac,  xxviii. 

,  Mathieu   d',  councillor  at  Quebec, 

3^4,  3^5,  388;  grants  of  land,  325; 
friend  of  Nelson,  389,  390. 
— ,  Mathieu   d\   the  younger,  in   New 
Brunswick,  xxviii,  324,  3255  friend 
of  Nelson,  xxviii,  389,  390. 
— ,  Rene  d',  in  New  Brunswick,  xxviii, 
324,  325;   defends  fort,  325;  friend 
of  Nelson,  xxviii,  389,  390. 
Anastase,  Father.      See  Douay. 
Andastes  Indians,  identified,  320;  habi- 
tat, 320,  321. 
Andastogueron  Indians,  language,  733. 
Andre,  Louis,  authority  on  Algonquian 

language,  733. 
Andros,  Sir  Edmond,  uprising  against, 

265. 
Angola,  Portuguese  colony,  282,  283; 

customs,  632;  ships,  636. 
Angui,  Messieurs  d',  provision  Placen- 

tia,  282. 
Annapolis,  site,  331;  population,   331. 

See  also  Port  Royal. 
Anne,  ruler  of  England,  3 ;  war  in  reign 

of,  5. 
Anschild    (Anskoeld),    Frederick,     re- 
puted discoverer,  309-311;  origin  of 
myth  of,  309;   Journals,  310. 
Anse  du  Tonnerre.    See  Bay,  Thunder. 
Aoutaerobi,  Indian  spirit,  603. 
Apache  Indians,  medicine  men  among, 

468. 
Appleton  (Wis.),  rapids  at,  174. 
Apple-trees,  of  Canada,  319,  364;  fruit 

described,  367. 
Aragon,  capital,  lxi,  9,  718;  govern- 
ment, 720,  721;  social  classes,  724, 
725;  customs,  727-729;  physical 
characteristics  of  people,  721;  women, 
722,  723,  729,  730;  dress,  726; 
morality,  723,  724,  728-730:  food, 


ATT 

Aragon  {continued). 

721,    728;   wines,    721;  inns,    721; 
carriages,  725,  726. 
Arce,  Sieur  d\      See  Isaac,  baron  La- 

hontan. 
Arctomys  pruniosus,  1 1 1 . 
Arctostaphylos  ura-ursa,  474. 
Aria.      See  Viele. 
Aristotle,  Lahontan  describes,  xiv,  116, 

117. 
Arkansa  Indians,  hunt  buffalo,  203, 204; 
Lahontan  meets,  203-205,  465,  466; 
trade  with  Illinois,  204;  possess  iron 
instruments,   204;  La  Salle  among, 
204;  French  term  for  Siouan  tribe, 
204;  migrations,  204;  sketch,   204. 
Arkansas,  Indians  of,  204. 
Army,  troops  in  Canada,  xi,  xv,  386, 
387;  first  troops  arrive,  392;  quar- 
tered, xii,  xiv,  387;  work  for  habi- 
tants, 387;  in  trade,   387;  relations 
between   officers  and  soldiers,   391; 
pay  of  officers,  383;  marriage  of  offi- 
cers, 387,  388;  pay  of  soldiers,  383. 
Arpent,  French  measure,  defined,  35. 
Arreche,  Sieur  d' ,  French  merchant,  655. 
Arrow-heads  (iron),  in  fur-trade,  378. 
Asher,  George  M.,  Henry  Hudson  the 

Navigator,  309. 
Ash-trees,  of  Canada,  364. 
Aspens,  of  Canada,  365;  described,  371; 

food  of  beavers,  371,  480,  482. 
Asps,  in  Canada,  352;  poisonous,  357. 
Assan-oustick,  Indian  word  for  toma- 
hawk, 402. 
Assiniboin  (Assinipoual)  Indians,  habi- 
tat, 304,  305,  342,    343;  language, 
342,  343;  tribe  associated  with,  343; 
migrations,  343. 
Associates  of  Montreal,  53,  55,  233. 
Astrolabe,  described,  401. 
Atinton  Indians.      See  Teton  Indians. 
Attikamek  (Attikamegues)  Indians,  lan- 
guage, 340;  habitat,  340;  destroyed, 
340;  sketch,  340. 


Index 


753 


AUN 

Aunay,  Count  d',  escort  to  Lahontan, 
257,  258;  thanked,  259. 

Aunoy,  Madam  d',  647. 

Authoutantas  Indians.    See  Oto  Indians. 

Auvergne,  commerce  of,  725;  mules, 
633. 

Aux,  Chevalier  Pierre  d' ,  sent  on  em- 
bassy to  Iroquois,  xxvi,  238,  239, 
508;  imprisoned,  xxvi,  238,239,  5085 
escapes,  239;  brings  information, 
239;  sketch,  239. 

Avaux,  Count  d',  Lahontan' s  patron, 
11,  12. 

Aveiro,  Lahontan  at,  619,  625,  626} 
harbor,  622;  situation,  625;  salt 
works,  625. 

Aveneau,  Father  Claude,  chaplain  at 
Fort  St.  Joseph,  xx,  140;  sketch, 
140. 

Awls,  in  fur-trade,  377. 

Axes,  in  fur-trade,  377. 

Aztec  calendar,  428. 


Baccaleos,  early  name  for  Newfound- 
land and  Labrador,  307. 
Badgers,  Canadian  like  European,  343; 

animal  resembling,  344. 
Bain,  James,  jr.,  Henry  s   Travels  and 

Adventures,  99,  219,  309,  357,  380. 
Balenots,    in    Canada,   358;  described, 

360. 
Balzac,  Jean   Louis  Guez   de,   Letters, 

692;  Dissertations,  692. 
Bar-Haven  (havre  de  barre),  described, 

622. 
Bases,  small  fish,  358. 
Baskets,  of  birch-bark,  370. 
Basques,   early  American  explorers,  x; 

fisheries  off  New  Foundland,  308. 
Basse-Pyrenees,  Lahontan  born  in,  ix. 
Bastille,  French  prison,  53,   265,   293, 

294;  Lahontan  fears,  xxxii. 
Batteurs  de  faux,  identified,  no;  size, 

351- 

48 


BAY 

Bay  of  Biscay,  fishermen  at  Newfound- 
land, 275,  305;  reputation  of  sailors, 
272;  soldiers,  276,  278;  aid  in  de- 
fence, 279,  2815  captains  favor  La- 
hontan, 288;  harbors  in,  294. 

—  Chaleurs,  described,  3245  origin  of 
name,  324;  fishing  villages,  306. 

—  Chequamegon,  traders  near,  315; 
French  post  on,  209. 

— ■  Dingle,  on  west  coast  of  Ireland, 
302. 

—  Fortune,  Newfoundland,  334. 

—  Francaise.      See  Fundy. 

—  Fundy,  330;  explored,  324;  tercen- 
tenary of  settlement,  324. 

—  Georgian,  islands  in,  154,  218;  route 
through,  218,  273;  north  channel, 
218;  Indians  near,  340,  488. 

— -  Grand.      See  Grand  Traverse. 

—  Grand  Traverse  (Mich.),  identified, 
208;  early  names  for,  208;  affluent 
of,  210;  beaver  hunting  grounds, 
481 ;  described,  210. 

—  Green,  French  name  for,  146,  167; 
significance,  1 46 ;  fur-trade,  146,168; 
location,  167,  494;  islands  in,  167; 
Lahontan  visits,  xxiv,  xlii,  167-173; 
described,  167;  tides  in,  168;  Indian 
villages  near,  xxiv;  Jesuit  mission 
near,  xviii,  168;  fertility  of,  168. 

—  Hamilton  (Ganadoke,  Ganaraske), 
321,  322;  Iroquois  hunting  ground, 
323. 

—  Hudson,  origin  of  name,  311;  de- 
scribed, 309,  314;  climate,  314;  dis- 
covery, 309-311;  explorations,  244, 
310,  312;  boundary,  302;  natives, 
47,  308,  309,  312,  342,  734;  French 
posts,  313;  English  posts,  312,  313, 
316;  French  and  English  struggle 
for,  69,  217,  236,  244,  312-314; 
fur-trade,  244,  31 1-3 14. 

—  Irondequoit,  location,  125. 

—  James,  French  expelled  from,  314. 

—  Missisaguas.      See  Georgian  Bay. 


754 


Index 


BAY 

Bay  Mortier,  in  Placentia  Bay,  338; 
origin  of  name,  338. 

—  Noquet,  317. 

—  Notre  Dame  (Newfoundland),  333. 

—  de  TOurs  qui  Dort  (Sleeping  Bears). 
See  Grand  Traverse  Bay. 

—  Papinachois,  location,  261. 

—  Passamaquoddy,     settlement,     324, 

33*- 

—  Placentia,  location,  334;  harbor  of 
refuge,  335,  336;  town  on,  335; 
size,  335;  harbor,  338. 

—  Quiberon,  French  harbor,  294. 

—  Quinte,  mission  at,  70;  portage  to, 
318. 

—  Saginaw,  size,  318;  islands,  143,  318, 
3195  navigation,  318,  319;  beaver 
hunting  grounds,  481;  Lahontan 
crosses,  143. 

—  St.  Lawrence,  in  Placentia  Bay,  3385 
ship-building  at,  338. 

—  Savage,  discovered  by  Anschild,  310. 

—  Seven  Islands,  location,  261. 

—  Thunder  (Lake  Huron),  Lahontan 
passes,  143. 

—  Toronto,  size,  317;  location,  317, 
318;  projected  fort  on,  273,  318. 
See  also  Georgian  Bay. 

—  Trepassey,  location,  334. 

—  White  (Newfoundland),  308. 
Bayonne,  port  of  departure  for  Canada, 

373;  brandy  exported  from,  375; 
harbor,  622;  harbor  improved  by 
Lahontan,  ix,  xxi,  150;  grant  of,  ix; 
bourgeois,  ix;  money  seized  at,  xxi, 
15 1 5  Lahontan  at,  698. 

Beads,  Venetian,  in  fur-trade,  378. 

Beans,  raised  by  Indians,  148;  at  Green 
Bay,  168;  on  River  Long,  187. 

Bearberry.      See  Sacacommis. 

Beam,  engineering  works  at,  xxi,  150; 
justice  of,  151 5  parlement  at  Pau, 
150,  707;  French  officer  from,  328, 
329;  Lahontan  a  native  of,  ix;  re- 
former-general, ix;  governor,  x;  com- 
merce, 725;  witchcraft,  696-710. 


BEA 

Bears,  described,  115,  343,  346,  347; 
Polar,  described,  344,  347,  34S; 
hibernation,  115,484;  hunted,  114, 
115,  346,  482-484;  used  for  food, 
1 15,  169,  482;  near  Fort  St.  Joseph, 
484;  price  of  skins,  380;  Norwegian 
trade  in  skins,  681;  not  enemies  of 
beaver,  480. 

Beaucourt,  Josue  Dubois  de  Berthelot, 
sieur  de,  aids  in  fortifying  Quebec, 
265;  commands  party  against  Iro- 
quois, 266;  sketch,  266. 

Beaujeu,  — ,  commander  of  La  Salle's 
vessel,  335. 

Beauport.      See  Juchereau. 

Beaupre,  origin  of  name,  32;  location, 
xii;  habitants  of,  xii;  Lahontan  at, 
xii,  34-38;  sketch,  34. 

Beauvais,  — ,  commandant  at  Fort  St. 
Joseph,  xviii. 

Beauvilliers,  Paul,  duke  of,  French 
courtier,  sketch,  227. 

Beaver-eater.      See  Carcajou. 

Beavers,  described,  1 71-173;  nearly 
extinct,  481,  483;  habitat,  319, 
326,  344,  481;  homes  of,  170,  171, 
477,  479,  480;  different  kinds,  343, 
345,  346;  amphibious,  170,  476; 
land-beavers,  170,  171,  482,  484, 
485;  habits,  1 71-173,  479,  480; 
food,  371,  480,  482;  sagacity,  8, 
172,  476-478;  make  dams,  478, 
479;  sentinels,  477,  478,  4S0;  tree- 
felling,     477,     480;      domesticated, 

170,  171;  enemies,  480,  485;  de- 
fenses, 480;  parasites,  171;  hunted, 
82,  143,  171,  172,  175,  319,  349, 
481-485,   507,   573-575  5    bait  f°r> 

171,  482,  483,  485;  traps,  482-485; 
tail  used  for  food,  169;  flesh,  173; 
skins  in  commerce,  54,91,  122,  377, 
383,  591,  609;  price,  54,  91,  101, 
J73>  3795  compared  with  muskrats, 
1 10;  variety  of  pelts,  379;  method  of 
preparing,  485;  valued,  172,  280, 
398;  farmers-general  of,  382. 


Index 


755 


BEC 

Bees  de  scie,  species  of  duck,  352. 
Beech,  in  Canada,  364. 
Bees,  in  Canada,  352;  sting,  357. 
Begon,  Monsieur  de,  courtier  of  Louis 

XIV,  254. 
Belin,  Lahontan  at,  648. 
Belle  Isle,  French  harbor,  294. 
Benedictines,  in  Viana,  621,  622. 
Beothics,  aborigines  of  Newfoundland, 

334;  hatred  of  whites,  334;  sketch, 

334- 
Beray,  — ,  sieur,  Biscayan  captain,  288. 
Bergeres,  Raymond  Blaise  des,  sieur  de 

Rigauville,  commandant  at  Niagara, 

162;     seeks    reinforcements,      162; 

sketch,  131. 
Berlin  (Wis.),  on  Fox  River,  178. 
Bernon,  Samuel,  chief  merchant  of  Can- 
ada, 374. 
Berrien  County  (Mich.),  208, 
Berthelot,  Canadian  family,  39.   See  also 

Beauport. 
Beschefer,   Thierry,  Jesuit   missionary, 

starts  for  Canada,   259;  superior  at 

Quebec,  259;  sketch,  259. 
Biche,  French  name  for  elk,  103. 
Bienville,  Jean  Baptiste  le  Moyne,  sieur 

de,  founds  Louisiana,  74. 
Biggar,  H.  P.,  Early  Trading  Companies 

of  Neiv  France,  303. 
Big  Mouth.      See  Grangula. 
Birch,  of  Canada,  364;  described,  370. 
Birch-bark,  maps  drawn  on,  427;  used 

for    canoes,    63,    370;   paper,    870; 

baskets,  370. 
Bissot.      See  Jolliet,  and  Couillard. 
Blackbirds,  in  Canada,  350. 
Blueberries   (bluets),   in    Canada,    365; 

described,    372;    uses,    373;    Indian 

food,  372. 
Boat,  — ,  wounded  at  Placentia,  279. 
Boats,    flat-bottomed,     85.       See    also 

Canoes. 
Bodin    (Bodinus),   Jean,   Demonomanie 

des  Sorciers,  704. 
Bois,  L.  E.,  Isle  a"  Orleans,  39. 


BRA 

"  Bon,"  shipwrecked  off  Newfoundland, 
336. 

Bonaventure,  Claude  Denis,  sieur  de, 
announces  Frontenac's  restoration, 
227;  sketch,  227. 

Bonnecamps,  Father  Joseph  Pierre  de, 
descends  St.  Lawrence,  68. 

Bonrepos.      See  Dusson. 

Bordeaux,  port  of  departure  for  Canada, 
88,  373;  wines  exported  from,  375; 
Lahontan  at,  697. 

Bossuet,  — ,  minister  of  state,  150. 

Boston,  revolution  in,  265;  fort  in  har- 
bor, 265;  French  prison  rs  in,  xxvi, 
239,  265,  330;  receives  information, 
265;  capital  of  New  England,  330; 
French  inhabitants  near,  330;  unde- 
fended, 239;  fleet  at,  289;  editions 
of  Lahontan  in  Athenaeum,  liii-xciii; 
in  Public  Library,  liii-xciii. 

Boucher,  Pierre,  governor  of  Three 
Rivers,  98. 

—  family,  98. 

Boucherville,  Lahontan  at,  xiv,  96-117; 
review  at,  103;  La  Forest,  125; 
sketch,  98. 

Bouillon,  Cardinal  de,  Lahontan' s  pa- 
tron, 1 1. 

Bourbon  regiment,  Lahontan  in,  x. 

Bourke,  John  G.,  "Medicine  Men  of 
the  Apache,"  468. 

Bouteux,  fishing  nets,  described,  401. 

Bouts  de  Quievres,  small  fishing  nets, 
402. 

Bragelonne,  Claude,  relative  of  La- 
hontan, xi. 

—  family,  relatives  of  Lahontan,  xi, 
253. 

Branchus,   species    of   duck,    described 

355;  origin  of  name,  355. 
Brandy,     imported    to    Canada,     373  ; 

price,    375;     valuable    in    fur-trade, 

378,  568. 
Brazil,   Portuguese    colony,    282,    284; 

aborigines  of,    284;    customs,    632; 

fleet,  624,  637. 


756 


Index 


BRE 

Brebeuf,  Jean  de,  authority  on  Huron- 
Iroquois  language,  733. 

Breccia,  on  Cape  Breton,  333,  334. 

Bretons,  early  explorers  and  fishers,  307, 
308,  324. 

Brigantine,  built  for  Frontenac,  239, 
241,  242;  described,  402. 

Brinton,  D.  G.,  Myths  of  New  World, 

43  5>  447.    448,  468,  472,  5IQ- 

British  Museum,  editions  of  Lahontan 
in,  liii-xciii. 

Brittany,  Lahontan  in,  264;  harbor, 
294;  fishers  from,  324.  See  also 
Bretons. 

Brouillon,  Jacques  Frantjois  de,  governor 
of  Placentia,  xxix,  276,  287;  de- 
fends Placentia  against  English,  xxix, 
276-278;  Lahontan  presents  himself 
to,  287,  288;  commends  Lahontan, 
279;  dislikes  Lahontan,  xxxi,  12, 
287-289;  attempts  to  prevent  La- 
hontan's  escape,  294,  297;  Lahontan 
accuses,  xxxi,  289-294,  337,  338; 
accuses  Lahontan  at  court,  293,  297; 
unpopular,  xxxi,  292-294;  extor- 
tionate, 288,  290,  337,  338;  wife, 
291;  letters,  288;  sketch  287,  288. 

Brulots,  in  Canada,  352;  described,  357, 

358- 

Bruyas,  Father  Jacques,  Jesuit  mission- 
ary, 56;  superior,  56;  aids  in  treaty 
of  peace,  56;  Indian  grammar,  56; 
acts  as  interpeter,  84;  sketch,  56. 

Bryce,  George,  Hudson  s  Bay  Company, 
312,  314. 

Buffalo  (Wild  Beet),  343;  on  Missis- 
sippi, 170,  203;  on  River  Long,  192, 
197;  on  Missouri,  202;  on  Lake 
Erie,  320;  hunted,  193,  194,  203; 
hunted  by  puma,  345;  used  in  man- 
ufactures, 194,  213,  214;  used  as 
food,  197. 

Bustards,  Canadian  resemble  European, 
351;  in  Wisconsin,  174;  manner  of 
hunting,  109. 


CAN 

Button,  Sir  Thomas,  early  English  navi- 
gator, 310,  311. 

Caddoan  family,  tribes  of,  200. 

Cadillac,  Antoine  la  Mothe,  sieur  de, 
founder  of  Detroit,  xix,  xlvi,  125, 
133;  secures  upper  country,  xlvi. 

California,  Indian  customs  of,  473. 

Callieres-Bonnevue,  Louis  Hector,  sieur 
de,  governor  of  Montreal,  86,  88; 
governor  of  New  France,  86,  129; 
on  Denonville's  expedition,  120;  aids 
in  defences  of  Quebec,  242;  inter- 
cedes for  English  envoy,  246;  sketch, 
86. 

Calumet,  58;  described,  75,  76,  168, 
169,  402;  origin  of  name,  402;  In- 
dian name  for,  402;  uses,  75,  76, 
423,  424;  token  of  peace,  75,  77,  80, 
81,  508,  509;  sacred,  508;  dance, 
83;  significance  of  dance,  168,  169; 
Foxes  dance,  175;  limit  of  authority, 
189. 

Camanistigoyan.      See  Kaministiquia. 

Campbell,  Henry  C,  "  Radisson  and 
Groseilliers,"  312. 

Canada,  governor  of,  153;  Library  of 
Parliament  (Ottawa),  editions  of  La- 
hontan in,  liii-xciii;  Indian  depart- 
ment Report,  55;  Royal  Society 
Proceedings,  xviii,  hi,  36,  37,  51,  98, 
145,  151,  312;  Archives,  xviii,  87, 
125,  519       See  also  New  France. 

Canadian  "Journal,  154. 

Canal,  Cornwall,  68. 

—  Grenville,  217. 

—  Lachine,  67. 

Canibas  Indians,  habitat,  327,  328;  lan- 
guage, 339;  allies  of  French,  328; 
characterized,  339. 

Canissec,  Count,  Danish  envoy,  688. 

Canoes,  how  made,  63,  64;  of  birch- 
bark,  370;  cedar,  63,  371;  white 
wood,  372;  skins,  106,  307,  4815 
gummed  for  water,  1585  supports  of, 


Index 


757 


CAN 

Canoes  {continued). 

404,  406,  407;  shape,  65;  size,  62, 
63;  weight,  64;  tonnage,  63;  light 
draught,  63,  64;  working  of,  65,  66; 
unsteady,  62,  63;  price,  65;  Iro- 
quois inferior,  138;  used  in  war- 
parties,  501;  not  useful  in  discover- 
ies, 211;  travel  in,  46,  62-65,  67; 
value  of  cargoes,  54,  64. 

Cantabrian  soldiers,  defend  Placentin, 
276. 

Capa  y  d'espada,  term  for  councillors, 
402. 

Cape  Diamond  (Quebec),  265;  place  of 
execution,  268. 

—  Finisterre,  Lahontan  passes,  257, 
258,  295,  649,  650. 

—  Forillon,  off  Gaspe,  306. 

—  Hurd,  off  Georgian  Bay,  154. 

—  North,  northern  extremity  of  Eu- 
rope, 301. 

—  Race,  origin  of  name,  28;  descried, 
29;  coast  near,  334;  longitude,  302. 

—  Ray,  location,  30,  333;  passage 
choked  with  ice,  325;  coast  near,  334. 

—  St.  Francis.      See  Long  Point. 

—  St.  Mary  (Newfoundland),  275. 

—  Tourmente,  location,  32,  39,  2615 
origin  of  name,  32. 

—  West,  in  Iceland,  301. 
Cap  Rogo.     See  Cape  Race. 
Caps,  in  fur-trade,  377. 

Carcajous,  characterized,  344;  hunted, 
in. 

Caribou,  identified,  107;  habitat,  316, 
344;  manner  of  hunting,  107;  price 
of  skins,  380. 

Carignan-Salieres,  regiment  de,  in  Can- 
ada, 35,  36,  52,  59;  members  perish 
with  cold,  60;  officers,  1  =  5,  328; 
disbanded,  328;  sketch,  36. 

Carolina,  early  explorations  of  coast, 
303;  parrots  in,  354. 

Carp,  in  Great  Lakes,  359;  Mississippi, 
359;  described,  362. 


CED 

Cascades,  St.  Lawrence  rapids,  portage 
of,  67. 

Carter-Brown  Library,  editions  of  La- 
hontan in,  liii-xciii. 

Cartier,  Jacques,  explores  St.  Lawrence, 
31,  303;  gives  geographical  names, 
3X>  39>  51?  261,  324;  second  voy- 
age, 67,  303;  alludes  to  Niagara, 
137;  accounts  of,  303;  explorations, 
303;  sketch,  303;   Voyages,  303. 

Cartography,  xxxviii,  8-10,  28,  200, 
208,  376. 

Casson  de  Dollier,  Francois,  Sulpitian 
superior,  55;  chaplain  in  Mohawk 
campaign,  55;  accompanies  La  Salle, 
55;  historian  of  Montreal,  55. 

Castor  canadensis,  345. 

Castor  gras  tfhi'ver.      See  Beaver  skins. 

Cataracoui.     See  Fort  Frontenac. 

Cataract  du  Trou,  St.  Lawrence  rapid, 
67. 

Catholic  University  Bulletin,  512. 

Catlin,  George,  explores  quarries  at 
Pipestone,  76. 

Catlinite,  used  for  calumets,  76. 

Caton,  John  D.,  Antelope  and  Deer  of 
North  America,  103. 

Caudisona  terguemina,  357. 

Caughnawaga,  mission  village  at,  56. 

Cavelier,  Abbe  Jean,  brother  of  La  Salle, 
arrives  at  Mackinac,  xxi,  144;  Sul- 
pitian, 145;  sketch,  145. 

—  Jean,  nephew  of  La  Salle,  at  Mack- 
inac, xxi,  144;  sketch,  145. 

Cayuga  (Goyoguans)  Indians,  77,  80; 
habitat,  58,  323,  341;  language, 
341;  fishing  grounds,  155,  156; 
chief  of,  233;  request  missionaries, 
70;  English  should  remove,  399. 

—  County  Historical  Society,  Collec- 
tions, 127,  131. 

Cedar,  of  Canada,  365;  described,  371; 

two  species,    371;  used  for  canoes, 

63,  371;  odor  of,  371. 
Cedars,  rapids  in  Fox  River,  174. 


758 


Index 


CEL 

Celoron,   Jean    Baptiste    de   Blainville, 

wife  of,  391. 
Cenis  Indians,  mission  to,  145. 
Central   America,    Indian   customs   of, 

473- 

Cer<vus  alches,  1035  canadensis,  103; 
virginianus,  107. 

Chalumeau.      See  Calumet. 

Chambly,  Jacques  de,  Canadian  officer, 
52. 

Chambly.      See  Fort  Chambly. 

Champigny,  Jean  Bochart  de,  intendant 
of  New  France,  102,  120;  advances 
to  Fort  Frontenac,  120,  121;  voyage 
to  Montreal,  239;  Lahontan  visits, 
220;  sketch,  103. 

—  Madam  de,  intercedes  for  Iroquois 
prisoners,  266,  267;  mercy  of,  269. 

Champlain,  Samuel  de,  gives  geograph- 
ical names,  32,  51,  66,  118,  325; 
builds  Fort  St.  Louis,  40;  controls 
liquor  traffic,  94;  hears  of  Niagara, 
137;  visits  Huron,  219;  founds 
Quebec,  303,  331;  explores  Bay  of 
Fundy,  324,  331;  discovery  cele- 
brated, 324;  map,  325;  makes  ene- 
mies of  Iroquois,  xv. 

Chaouanon,  Indian  slave,  156. 

Chapeau  Rouge,  location,  334,  338. 

Charles  II  (England),  orders  peace  with 
Iroquois,  61,  79;  subservient  to 
France,  61;  patronizes  Radisson  and 
Groseilliers,  313;  sells  part  of  New- 
foundland, 275. 

Charlevoix,  Pierre  Francois  Xavier  de, 
Jesuit  historian,  42,  44,  149;  de- 
scribes Nipissing,  342;  exposes  fallacy 
of  River  Long,  xxxix;  Histoire  de 
Nowvelle  France,  149,  217,  279; 
Journal  Historique,  xxxix,  42. 

Chateaubriand,  Francois  Auguste,  vi- 
comte  de,  French  romanticist,  x-lviii. 

Chauanon  Indians.  See  Shawnee  In- 
dians. 

Chequamegon,  French  post  on,  315. 


COD 

Cherries,  of  Canada,  364,  365;  de- 
scribed, 366,  367. 

Chestnuts,  of  Canada,  364;  on  Lake 
Erie,  319;  in  Seneca  country,  131 5 
in  Illinois,  367. 

Chevaliers,  species  of  water-fowl,  351. 

Chicago  (Chekakou),  Indians  at,  3405 
Lahontan,  207;  site  described,  207; 
portage,  xxiv,  207;  canal,  207. 

Chicoutimi  County  (Quebec),  260. 

China,  passage  to,  sought,  309. 

Chipmunk,  described,  348. 

Chippewa  (Salteur)  Indians,  French 
name  for,  149,  340;  habitat,  149, 
152,  493;  physical  characteristics, 
415;  brave,  159,  1605  courtship  and 
marriage  among,  457;  war  customs, 
502-509;  secret  society  among,  46S5 
totems,  511;  calendar,  427,  428; 
with  Iroquois,  xxii,  149,  1 53-161 5 
capture  Iroquois,  159;  rescue  slaves, 
160;  at  Fort  St.  Joseph,  161;  warn 
Foxes  of  Iroquois  raid,  489,  493; 
war  with  Foxes,  489,  494;  charac- 
terized, 340. 

Chonkasketons  (Sonkaskiton)  Indians, 
Siouan  tribe,  343;  significance  of 
name,  343;  habitat,  342;  language, 

343- 
Christianity,  discussion  of,  517-550. 
Christy,  Miller,  Voyages  of  Captain  Luke 

Foxe   and   Captain    Thomas   James, 

310. 
Citrons.      See  Mandrake. 
Citrouille,   in  Canada,   364;  described, 

369;  Indian  food,  148,  369. 
Clarke,  John  M.,  "Perce:  a  brief  sketch 

of  its  geology,"  305. 
Coal,  exported  from  Canada,  374. 
Cockles,  in  Canada,  359,  361. 
Cod,    in    Canada,    3 58;    export,    374; 

demand  for,  394;  method  of  drying, 

336. 
Cod  fishery,  off  Newfoundland,  27,  290, 

305»   3o8>   332>  333>   336>  3375  off 


Index 


759 


COD 

Cod  fishery  (continued). 

Gaspe,  305,  306;  near  St.  Law- 
rence, 306;  off  Acadia,  324,  326; 
Tadoussac,  31;  time  for,  337;  bait, 
337,  360,  361;  value,  338. 

Colbert,  Jean  Baptiste,  French  minister, 
118. 

Colin,  — ,  Indian  interpreter,  accom- 
panies d'Aux,  238. 

Collars.      See  Wampum. 

Collection  des  Manuscrits  relatifs  a  la 
Nou-velle  France,  26,  124,  257. 

Comitatus,  among  Indians,  500. 

Commerce,  235;  merchants  at  Mon- 
treal, 53,  96,  97;  profits  of,  54,  375- 
377;  exchange  with  France,  101, 
3765  general  view,  373-378;  few 
exports,  373,  3745  with  French  West 
Indies,  374;  season  for,  375;  inter- 
nal, 376;  reform  needed,  391,  392; 
customs  tariff,  373.  See  also  fur- 
trade. 

Compagnie  des  Indes  Occidentales,  91. 

Company  of  Domain,  91. 

—  of  Merchants  of  London,  discoverers 
of  North-West  Passage,  3 1 2. 

—  of  One  Hundred  Associates,  xi,  34, 

253- 

—  of  New  France,  41,  303;  founded 
at  Rouen,  303. 

Compass,  variation  of,  403. 
Conestoga     Indians,      Huron  -  Iroquois 

tribe,  habitat,  321. 
Conges.     See  Licenses  for  fur-trade. 
Connecticut,  Indians  of,    90;  troops  to 

invade  Canada,  240. 
Conurus  carolinensis,  354. 
Cook,   Samuel   F.,   Drummond  Island, 

153- 
Coots,    Canadian    resemble    European, 

350. 
Copper,  used  by  Indians,  195;  found  on 

Lake  Superior,   316;  purity  of  ore, 

316. 
Coregonus  clupeiformus,  147. 


cou 

Corlaer,  Indian  title  for  governor  of 
New  York,  82,  84,  236;  origin  of 
term,  82. 

Corlear.      See  Schenectady. 

Cormaillon,  —  de,  French  officer  in 
Danish  army,  674. 

Cormorants,  in  Canada,  351. 

Costabelle,  sieur  Pastour  de,  governor 
of  Placentia,  276;  of  Cape  Breton, 
276;  envoy  to  English,  276,  277; 
sketch,  276. 

Cotes  of  Canada,  described,  34,  35. 

Cones,  Elliott,  Early  History  of  North- 
west, 474;  identifies  River  Long,  xl. 

Couillard,  Marie,  mother-in-law  of 
Jolliet,  captured  by  English,  243, 
244;  effects  exchange  of  prisoners, 
244,  249;  sketch,  244. 

Courbeious  (bird),  in  Canada,  351. 

Courcelles,  Daniel  de  Remy,  sieur  de, 
war  with  Mohawk,  59;  recommends 
site  of  Fort  Frontenac,  69;  sketch, 

59- 

Coureurs  de  bois,  48,  430;  term  de- 
fined, 403;  bravery  of,  237;  relia- 
bility, 477;  thievery,  100,  537;  por- 
digality,  54;  in  fur-trade,  xviii,  54, 
92,  99,  140,  153,  164,  168,  207, 
315,  430;  extent  of  ranging,  304; 
restricted,  99,  399;  on  Great  Lakes, 
125;  Lake  Superior,  315;  Mackinac, 
136;  Maine,  236,  237;  New  York, 
236;  Sault  Ste.  Marie,  488,  489; 
Illinois,  207;  commandants,  1 64, 165, 
209,  217;  protected  by  Perrot,  53; 
under  Duluth,  73;  enemies  of  En- 
glish, 125-128,  209,  216,  247;  gar- 
rison Fort  St.  Joseph,  139;  repair 
Fort  Frontenac,  232,  233;  aid  La- 
hontan,  141;  captured  by  Iroquois, 
270;  robbed  by  Iroquois,  77. 

Couttes  (Ecouttes),  Abbe  de,  uncle  of 
Lahontan,  xxvi,  253,  254. 

—  Jeanne  Franchise  le  Fascheux  de, 
Lahontan' s  mother,  x. 


760 


Index 


cow 

Cowper,  Capt.  — ,  English  naval  officer, 

650. 
Coyne,    James    H.,     '<  Exploration     of 

Great  Lakes,"  484. 
Crabs,  in  Canada,  359. 
Cranes,  in  Canada,  350. 
Cree  Indians.      See  Cristinaux  Indians. 
Creek  Cattaraugus,  portage  route,  155. 

—  Chautauqua,  portage  route,  155. 

—  Irondequoit,  rendezvous  for  expedi- 
tion, 125-127;  fort  at,  127. 

—  Mill  (Pa.),  identified,  155. 

—  Wood,  rendezvous  for  troops,  240. 
Crenger,  — ,  ship  commander,  648. 
Creoles,  defined,  402. 

Cristinaux  (Clistino,  Cree,  Killistinoe) 
Indians,  Algonquian  tribe,  343; 
habitat,  309,  342;  physical  traits, 
415;  language,  342,  343;  defeat 
Eskimo,  308,  309;  conduct  French 
to  Hudson  Bay,  312;  associated 
with  Assiniboin,  343;  present  num- 
bers, 309;  sketch,  309. 

Croche,  rapids  in  Fox  River,  174. 

Crocodiles,  described,  346,  347;  habitat, 
343,  346;  capture  of,  346;  man- 
eaters,  346;  Arkansa  kill,  204. 

Cucurbita  polymorpha,  148. 

Cungars,  in  Canada,  358. 

Cutlasses,  in  fur-trade,  378. 

Cuyler,  — ,  early  Dutch  trader,  82. 

Dabs  (fish),  described,  362;  in  Missis- 
sippi River,  178,  359;  in  Great 
Lakes,  362. 

Dakota  Indians.      See  Sioux  Indians. 

D'Amblemont,  — ,  commands  rein- 
forcements, 119. 

Danes,  discover  Labrador,  307;  reputed 
discoveries,  309,  310. 

Danoncaritaoui,  Seneca  village,  1  3  1 

Davis,  John,  early  English  navigator,  3 1  o 

— ,  Sylvanus,  narrates  fall  of  Fort  Loyal, 
237» 


DEN 

DeCosta,  Benjamin  F.,  Sailing  Direc- 
tions of  Henry  Hudson,  309. 

Deer,  described,  348,  349;  hunted  in 
Denmark,  669;  Newfoundland,  332; 
Canada,  343,  344;  near  Lake  Cham- 
plain,  xiv,  108,  109;  Lake  Huron, 
317;  Lake  Erie,  320,  322;  Lake 
Michigan,  210;  Wisconsin,  174, 
175;  Illinois,  206;  River  Long,  183, 
187;  manner  of  hunting,  107,  113, 
114;  used  as  food,  70,  114,  122, 
467,  468,  482;  skins,  193,  213, 
491;  price,  380. 

Dekanissore.      See  Teganisoreu. 

Denis,  — ,  captured  by  Iroquois,  224. 

Denmark,  character  of  people,  669-672; 
government,  673;  court,  667,  668, 
675,  676;  royal  tombs,  685;  society, 

672,  673;  cost  of  living,  681;  army, 

673,  674;  pay  of  officers,  674,  681; 
navy,  679-682;  laws,  675;  mone- 
tary system,  682,  683;  measures, 
683;  wines,  671;  beer,  671;  drunk- 
enness, 671,  672;  diseases,  676-678; 
horses,  684;  export  articles,  681; 
exact  ship  toll,  679,  680;  depend- 
encies, 664;  explorers,  309,  310; 
Lahontan  in,  xxxiii,  lxi,  9,  664-6S3. 

—  king  of,  3,  4;  character,  667;  hunter, 
669;  marksman,  669;  linguist,  667; 
royal  residences,  666,  668,  684;  nat- 
ural children,  676;  revenues,  673, 
674;  retinue,  684;  Lahontan  meets, 
679 

Denonville,  Jacques  Rene  de  Brisay,  mar- 
quis de,  governor  of  New  France, 
97;  destroys  Fort  Frontenac,  69, 
209,  225,  226,  271;  fortifies  Mon- 
treal, 98;  reinforced  from  upper 
lakes,  xviii,  73,  125,  126;  arranges 
a  review,  103;  expedition  against 
Indians,  xv,  11 8-1 34;  relations  with 
intendant,  103;  retains  Lahontan, 
xvi,  118,  121;  sends  him  to  upper 
country,  xvii,  132,  133,  151;  visited 


Index 


761 


DEN 

Denonville  (continued). 

by  Lahontan,  219,  220;  plans  de- 
fense of  upper  lakes,  xviii,  139;  sends 
messenger  to  Mackinac,  144,  208; 
orders  Lahontan  to  Quebec,  xxii,  1 64; 
Lachine  massacre,  224-226  ;  La 
Tourette  reports  to,  136;  promises 
reinforcements,  141;  commissions 
officers,  164;  arranges  peace,  xxii, 
157,  162,  163,  208,  209,  221,  223; 
relations  with  Adario,2o8,  209,  220- 
223  j  serves  on  expedition,  23  7$  re- 
called to  France,  xxv,  227,  228,  234; 
last  interview  with  Frontenac,  235; 
sketch,  97,  98. 

—  Marchioness  de,  97,  98,  234;  fears 
Iroquois,  224. 

De  Pere  (Wis),  mission  near,  16S; 
rapids,  174. 

Desnots  (Hainault),  — ,  French  officer, 
86,  87,  91,98. 

Des  Ormeaux,  Daulac  (Dollard),  de- 
fends Long  Sault,  217. 

Detroit,  founded,  xixj  country  described, 
139;  fruit  near,  139;  animals,  139; 
Indians,    155;  projected   post,    125, 

*33>  273- 

Devonshire,  William  Cavendish,  duke 
of,  dedication  to,  3;  patron  of  La- 
hontan, xxxiv;  sketch,  3. 

Didelphys  ^virginiana,   347. 

Dieppe,  port  of  departure  for  Canada, 
373;   birthplace  of  Longueuil,  74. 

Digby  (N.  S. ),  described,  331;  Gut,  out- 
let of  Port  Royal  basin,  331. 

Dionne,  — ,  curator  of  Laval  Univer- 
sity, identifies  fauna,  no,  in. 

—  Narcisse  E  ,  bibliography  of  Lahon- 
tan, Hi,  liii;  "  Chouart  et  Radisson," 
312;  Jacques  Car  tier,  3035  Quebec 
under  fws  Flags,  41. 

Do,  Chevalier.      See  d' Aux. 

Dogs,  used  in  hunting,  105,  in,    114, 

3495  for   drawing  sledges,    406;  as 

carriers,  45. 


DUL 

Dollard.     See  Des  Ormeaux. 

Dongan,  Thomas,  governor  of  New 
York,  61,  126,  157;  plans  to  con- 
trol fur-trade,  61,  126;  complains  of 
Fort  Niagara,  131;  sketch,  61. 

D'Opede,  — ,  Portuguese  ambassador, 
628. 

Dorman,  Rushton  M.,  Origin  of  Primi- 
tive Superstitions  among  Aborigines 
of  America,  435,  450. 

Dorsey,  James  Owen,  "Migrations  of 
Siouan  Tribes,"  200,  204;  "Omaha 
Sociology,"  499,  509. 

D'Orveilliers,  Francois  Chorel,  sieur  de, 
dit  St.  Romain,  commands  rear- 
guard, 127;  sketch,  127. 

Douay,  Father  Anastase,  La  Salle's 
chaplain,  at  Mackinac,  144,  145; 
founds  mission  to  Cenis  Indians,  145} 
sketch,  145;  Memoir,  145. 

Doughty,  Arthur  G.,  Quebec  under 
T-tvo  Flags,  41. 

Doves.      See  Pigeons. 

Druillettes,  Gabriel,  Jesuit  missionary, 

329>  33°- 

Drummond,  Sir  Gordon,  governor  of 
Canada,  153. 

Duchesneau,  Jacques,  sieur  de  la  Dous- 
siniere,  intendant  of  New  France, 
228;  favors  Jesuits,  228,  381;  op- 
poses Frontenac,  228,  381;  recalled, 
228;  sketch,  228. 

Ducks,  Canadian  resemble  European, 
350;  described,  355;  color,  350, 
355 i  varieties,  351,  352,  354;  on 
River  Long,  183,  187;  manner  of 
hunting,  109;  used  for  food,  431. 

Du  Creux,  Francois.  Historic  Cana- 
densis seu  Nova  Francia,  412. 

Duelling,  in  Hamburg,  660. 

Dugmore,  Arthur  R.,  "The  Outlaw; 
a  character  study  of  a  Beaver,"  477. 

Du  Luth  (Du  l'Hut,  Du  Lhut,  Dulurh), 
Daniel  Greysolon,  familiar  with  con- 
tinental interior,  xxxix,   xl,  315;  re- 


762 


Index 


DUL 

Du  Luth  (continued). 

inforcements  for  La  Barre,  72,  73; 
aids  Denonville,  73,  209;  captures 
English  traders,  126;  posts  on  Lake 
Superior,  315,  316;  among  Sioux, 
73;  Lahontan  with,  xviii,  133,  140, 
216;  D'Aillcboust  with,  233;  builds 
fort,  xviii,  136,  139;  at  Fort  St. 
Joseph,  xx,  139;  with  war  party, 
209;  his  uncle,  136;  his  brother, 
135,  136;  sketch,  73. 

Dumeni,  — ,  French  officer  in  Danish 
army,  674. 

Durantaye,  Olivier  Morel  de  la,  br"ngs 
aid  to  Denonville,  xviii,  125;  cap- 
tures English  traders,  125;  com- 
mandant at  Mackinac,  144,  164, 
209;  commander  of  coureurs  de 
bois,  164;  takes  possession  of  upper 
country,  xviii;  sketch,  125. 

Du  Rivau  Huet,  — ,  French  officer,  86, 
87,  92,  98. 

Dusson,  Francois,  sieur  de  Bonrepaux, 
ambassador  to  Denmark,  Lahontan 
meets,  xxxiii,  665,  666,  671,  685;  at 
Coldinck,  684;  Glucstat,  68  8;  letter 
to  Pontchartrain,  688,  694;  sketch, 
665. 

Du  Tas  (Tartre),  — ,  Canadian  officer, 
68,  69,  260. 

Dutch,  explorations,  309;  in  New  York, 
6,  7;  name  for  Indians,  320. 


Eagles,  described,  353,  354;  in  Can- 
ada, 350. 

Ecclesiastics,  condemn  Lahontan,  10; 
Lahontan  dislikes,  xv,  41,  98;  inter- 
fere in  private  affairs,  xv,  88-90,  383, 
384,  391;  control  Canadian  govern- 
ment, 381,  382,  385;  confidence  in, 
383.      See  also  New  France. 

Ecouttes.      See  Couttes. 

Ectopistes  migratoria,  no. 

Edits  et  Ordonnances,  384. 


ENG 

Edwards,  Jonathan,  writings  of,  734. 

Eels,  in  Canada,  358;  River  St.  Law- 
rence, 401;  Great  Lakes,  359;  man- 
ner of  catching,  49,  50,  401. 

Elephant,  Knights  of  the  Order  of,  675, 
676,  679. 

Eliot,  John,  writings  of,  734. 

Elks  (Originals),  described,  104,  105; 
identified,  103;  on  St.  Lawrence 
islands,  31;  Lake  Superior,  316; 
Lahontan  hunts,  xiv,  103;  manner  of 
hunting,  103-107,  112,  349,  476; 
skins,  106,  213;  Norwegian  trade  in 
skins,  681;  price  of  skins,  380;  used 
as  food,  468. 

Elms,  Canadian  resemble  European,  364; 
on  Lake  Erie,  319;  bark  used  for 
building,  418;  for  canoes,  319. 

Embroideries,     Canadian     imports    of, 

375- 

Encyclopedists,  relations  with  Lahon- 
•  tan,  xlvii. 

England,  rulers  of,  3 ;  in  War  of  Span- 
ish Succession,  5;  liberty  in,  12;  de- 
feated in  West  Indies,  26;  claims 
Great  Lakes  country,  127;  visited  by 
Lahontan,  xxxiv,  lxi. 

English,  in  fur-trade,  xviii,  78,  81,  82, 
98,  125,  126,  281,311-314,  326, 
395,  398-400;  furnish  cheap  goods, 
98,  99,  281,  326,  394,  396;  fleet 
invades  Canada,  31;  capture  Quebec 
(1628),  44,  (1759),  42;  capture  Port 
Royal,  244,  326,  330;  to  acquire 
Acadia,  326;  revolution  of  1688,  3, 
217,  218;  attempted  capture  of  Can- 
ada (i69o),xxvi,  240,  242-250;  cap- 
ture Fort  Frontenac  (1758),  69; 
capture  Fort  Niagara  (1759),  131; 
imprison  St.  Vallier,  165;  in  Hudson 
Bay,  217,  236,  244,  311-314;  allied 
with  Iroquois,  58,  59,  237,  238;  set- 
tlements in  Newfoundland,  332;  at- 
tack on  Placentia,  xxix,  275-279, 
281,  287-289,  292;  capture  Perrot, 


Index 


763 


ENG 

English  {continued). 

53;  alliance  with  France,  218;  sea- 
fight,  259,  260;  raid  into  Canada, 
262;  attack  St.  John,  325;  brave  but 
ill-disciplined,  247,  248;  colonists 
characterized,  399;  privateers,  650, 
651;  in  Maine,  236;  colonial  bound- 
aries, 301,  302;  explorations  for 
Northwest  Passage,  310. 

Enjalran,  Father  Jean,  wounded  in  Den- 
onville's  expedition,  129;  at  Dur- 
antaye's  prise  -  de  -  possession,  xviii; 
missionary  at  Mackinac,  xviii;  supe- 
rior for  upper  country,  xviii;  sketch, 
129. 

Eokoros,  xxxix,  xlii;  country  of,  176; 
language,  185;  numbers,  180,  182; 
characteristics,  182,  189;  houses, 
182;  government,  1S2;  enemies,  181; 
Lahontan  among,  xxiv,  1S0-182. 

Erasmus,  translated  by  Gueudeville,  xlv; 
house  at  Rotterdam,  652. 

Erie  Indians,  habitat,  320. 

Errieronon  Indians,  language  of,  733. 

Eskimo,  described,  306,  307;  habitat, 
306,  309;  numbers,  30S;  language, 
342;  treacherous,  30S;  cowardly, 
308;  boats,  307,  308;  incursions  by, 
305;  pursued  by  Cristinaux,  308, 
309;   cross  to  Newfoundland,   309, 

3  34- 

Esleich,  barony  of,  x. 

Espadon.      See  Sword-fish. 

Essanape  Indians,  habitat,  181,  184- 
186;  numbers,  184;  language,  747; 
capital  of,  186,  188;  cacique,  186- 
189;  superstitions,  xxxix,  xlii,  189; 
government,  186;  allies,  187;  ene- 
mies, 181,  1 82,  187;  boats,  187, 
188;  houses,  188;  unused  to  fire- 
arms, 188;  Lahontan  with,  xxiv, 
182-189,  x97>  presents  to,  187. 

Estrees,  Abbe  d',  Portuguese  ambas- 
sador, Lahontan  with,  628,  713;  be- 
friends French,  643. 


FOR 

Etechemin  (Quoddy)  Indians,  charac- 
terized, 339;  habitat,  339,  340;  lan- 
guage, 339;  nomads,  339. 

Explorations,  early  French,  303,  304; 
qualities  needed  in  explorers,  210- 
215;  methods  of  management,  210- 
215;  equipment  needful,  213,  214. 
See  also  the  several  explorers. 


Fallen  Timbers,  battle  of,  461. 

Fasting,  among  Jesuits,  534,  538. 

Felts  concolor,  345. 

Fenelon,  Franc,ois  de  Salignac,  Jansenist 
■writer,  11. 

Fer,  Nicolas  de,  cartographer,  8. 

Ferland,  J.  B.  A.,  Cours  a" '  Histoire  du 
Canada,  304. 

Ferns,  maiden-hair,  365;  described,  372; 
syrup  made  from,  372. 

Ferrets,  in  Canada,  343. 

Fiber  zibet/iicus,  1 1 1 . 

Fir,  of  Canada,  365;  described,  371; 
timber  made  from,  371;  in  Wiscon- 
sin, 177;  on  River  Long,  180. 

Fish,  as  food,  70,  122,  431;  in  Great 
Lakes,  xix,  359;  River  Long,  179; 
gold-colored  in  St.  Lawrence,  358, 
361;  armed  fish  in  Great  Lakes,  359, 
362;  enemies,  362. 

Fish-hooks,  in  fur-trade,  377. 

Fishing,  methods  at  Mackinac,  147,  148. 

Flint  stones,  in  fur-trade,  377. 

Florida,  parrots  in,  354. 

Flying-squirrels,  described,  348;  in  Can- 
ada, 344. 

Folles-Avoine.      See  Wild  Rice. 

Folles-Avoines  Indians.  See  Menom- 
inee Indians. 

Forest,  Frangois  Dauphine,  sieur  de  la, 
La  Salle's  lieutenant,  124;  brings 
message  to  Denonville,  124,  125; 
granted  Fort  St.  Louis,  xviii,  125, 
133;  at  Detroit,  xviii,  125;  rebuilds 
Fort  Miami,  208;  sketch,  125. 


764 


Index 


FOR 

Fort  Abittibi,  location,  342. 
■ —  Albany  (Ste.   Anne),   Iberville  cap- 
tures, 217;  messengers  from,  217. 

—  Bougio,  on  River  Taio,  649. 

—  Bourbon,  Radisson  builds,  313;  cap- 
tured for  English,  313. 

—  Chambly,  location,  52;  described, 
90,  91;  fear  of  attack  on,  262;  La- 
hontan  at,  xiii,  90,  91 ;  trade,  90,  91. 

—  Charles,  Hudson  Bay,  313. 

—  Crevecceur,  destroyed,  207,  208; 
sketch,  207. 

—  Front enac,  79,  323;  description  and 
sketch,  69;  built,  61,  69,  70;  im- 
portance of,  226,  271;  La  Barre  at, 
xiii,  69;  fur-trade  of,  75,  83;  de- 
stroyed, 69,  209,  226,  233,  395; 
restored,  68,  69,  233;  untenable,  69, 
225,  226,  271;  captured  by  English, 
69;  vessels  near,  395;  commandant 
at,  73,  125,  127,  162;  rendezvous 
for  Denonville's  expedition,  xvi, 
119— 121,  126;  Lahontan  at,  xiii, 
57,  68-72,  677;  peace  conference  at, 
61,  69,  83;  reinforcement  sought, 
134,  162;  garrison  supplied  by  In- 
dians, 122;  scurvy  at,  162;  suicide, 
368;  messengerto,  226;  raid  towards, 
266;  visited  by  Adario,  220. 

—  Gratiot  (Mich.),  French  fort  on  site 
of,  139. 

—  Kennebec.      See  Fort  Loyal. 

—  LaTourette,  on  Lake  Nipigon,  136. 

—  Loyal  (Kennebec,  Maine),  location, 
236;  French  attack  on,  236;  English 
narrative  of  capture,  237;  surrender, 
2.3 7 ;  flag  of,  at  Quebec,  237. 

—  Mackinac,  Indians  near,  73.  See 
also  Mackinac. 

—  Miami,  built  by  La  Salle,  208;  de- 
stroyed, 208;  rebuilt,  208. 

—  Nelson,  attacked,  313;  sketch,  313. 

—  Niagara,  323;  built  by  Denonville, 
xvi,  131;  importance  of,  131,  226, 
271;    Lahontan   at,   xix,   135,   677; 


FOU 

Fort  Niagara  {continued). 

besieged  by  Iroquois,  141,  142; 
commandants  of,  131;  Miamis 
at,  161-163;  sickness,  xxii,  162; 
pleases  Indian  allies,  132;  aban- 
doned, xxii,  162,  163,  226,  271; 
history,  131. 

—  Pemaquid.      See  Pemaquid. 

—  Pentagoet,  location,  328. 

—  Remy,  besieged  by  Iroquois,  224. 

—  Rolland,  besieged  by  Iroquois,  224; 
Lahontan  protects,  240;  sketch,  240. 

—  Ste.  Anne.      See  Albany. 

—  St.  Joseph,  site,  xviii,  139,  208,  318, 
3205  built,  xviii,  139;  described, 
xviii,  xxxvii,  139,  140;  commanded 
by  Beauvais,  xviii;  surrendered  to 
Lahontan,  xx,  139,  140;  Lahontan 
winters  at,  xx,  140-143,  149,  484; 
Lahontan  leaves,  xx,  143;  aban- 
doned, xxii,  xxiii,  xli,  152,  163;  re- 
victualed,  xxii,  155;  Lahontan  re- 
turns, xxii,  161;  restored,  272,  273; 
Indians  near,  418,  484;  bears,  484. 

—  St.  Julien,  Lisbon  fortification,  64Q. 

—  St.  Louis  (HI.),  site,  207;  Tonty 
commands,  125,  133,  207;  La  Forest 
commands,  xviii,  125. 

—  St.  Louis  (Newfoundland), 275;  loca- 
tion, 275,  335;  poorly  garrisoned, 
275;  bombarded,  278;  Lahontan  flees 
to,  348. 

—  St.  Louis  (Quebec),  described,  40, 
41;  governor's  residence,  235,  382; 
repaired  by  Frontenac,  235. 

—  Sorel.      See  Sorel. 

—  Suppose,  projected  forts,  272,  318, 
321. 

— -William,  site  of,  316. 

Forts,  projected  by  Lahontan,  272,  273, 
280;  early  French,  xxxix;  barriers 
against  Iroquois,  52;  near  mouth  of 
Ohio  (1702),  144. 

Foutereaux,  described,  no,  344;  iden- 
tified, in. 


Index 


765 


FOX 

Fox  (Outagami,  Renard)  Indians,  char- 
acterized, 341;  habitat,  34,  168, 
175,  478;  language,  176,  177,  341; 
physical  traits,  415;  calendar  of,  427; 
totems,  511;  village,  175,  177;  re- 
lations with  Sioux,  175,  176;  war 
with  Iroquois,  489-494,  502;  rela- 
tions with  Chippewa,  489,  493,  494; 
relations  with  French,  xlvi,  99, 
175,  176;  with  Eokoros,  176;  with 
Sauk,  175;  Lahontan  among,  xxiv, 
xli,  175,  176,  179-207,  448;  return 
to  Wisconsin,  207. 

Fox-Wisconsin  fur-trade  route,  nearest 
to  Mississippi,  168,  178;  portage, 
described,  177,  178;  Lahontan  at, 
177;  canal  at,  xxiv,  177;  history, 
177,  178. 

Foxes,  habitat,  347;  described,  343, 
347;  color,  343,  344,  347;  value  of 
skins,  347,  376,  379;  Norwegian 
trade  in  skins,  681;  traps  for,  482- 
484;  do  not  attack  beaver,  480. 

Franciscans.      See  Recollects. 

Franquelin,  J.  B.,  cartographer,  41. 

Frederick  IV  of  Denmark,  Lahontan' s 
patron,  3,  4. 

France,  ministers,  5;  diplomats,  12; 
West  Indian  colonies,  26;  carpenters, 
658;  alliance  with  Spain,  5;  at  war 
with  Spain,  191;  English  alliance, 
217,  218;  refugees  in  Denmark,  66  S; 
in  Holland,  655. 

French,  laws  compared  with  savage 
polity,  551-570;  religious  and  social 
customs  compared  with  savage,  5  1 7- 
550;  language  spoken  in  Denmark, 
669;  diseases,  593-605;  witchcraft 
among,  562-564,  566;  drunkenness, 
566;  immorality,  536-538,  540- 
546,  566,  567;  first  settlement  in 
Canada,  331;  Newfoundland,  333, 
334;  possessions  in  America,  334; 
take  possession  of  Northwest,  342. 
Frogs,  in  Canada,  352,  357. 


FUR 

Frontenac,  Louis  Baude,  count  dc,  ar- 
rival at  Quebec,  230,  231;  replaces 
Courcelle,  59,  60,  69;  superseded 
by  La  Barre,  xi,  26,  33,  381;  rela- 
tions with  intendant,  103;  restored 
to  governorship,  xxv,  227,  228;  op- 
posed by  Duchesneau,  228,  3S1;  by 
Jesuits,  227,  381;  favors  Recollects, 
43,  44,  7°.  413;  during  Phips's 
raid,  xxvi,  237—247;  relations  with 
Iroquois,  xxv,  59-61,  69,  73,  86, 
124,  232—234,  266,  267;  favors  La 
Salle,  33,  69;  quarrels  with  Perrot, 
53;  praises  Valrennes,  226;  builds 
Chateau  St.  Louis,  41,  235;  builds 
Fort  Frontenac,  69,  70,  232;  forti- 
fies Quebec,  263,  265;  warmly  wel- 
comed, xxv,  228,  230,  231;  relations 
with  Lahontan,  xxv-xxix,  xlv,  xlvi, 
230,  232,  237,  250,  252,  256,  257, 
262,  271,  272,  274,  280,  388-390; 
promotes  discovery,  60;  esteemed  by 
Indians,  xxv,  228;  power  of  appoint- 
ment, 257;  hospitality,  xxvii,  262; 
courtesy  to  English  prisoners,  xxviii, 
265;  controls  sovereign  council,  44, 
45;  issues  trading  licenses,  99;  rela- 
tions to  liquor  traffic,  94;  visits  Mon- 
treal, 231;  relation  to  Adario,  lxi,  9, 
149;  to  Teganisoren,  222;  to  Oure- 
ahe,  233,  234;  interview  withDenon- 
ville,  234;  services  to  New  France, 
xxxvii,  60;  sketch,  60. 

—  Countess  de,  267. 

Fruit  trees,  in  Acadia,  325;  on  Lake 
Erie,  319,  322;  on  Lake  St.  Clair, 
xx;  in  Illinois,  206. 

Furs,  chief  article  of  export,  374;  me- 
dium of  exchange,  376;  names  and 
prices,  379,  380. 

Fur-trade,  importance  to  Indians,  507; 
harmful  to  them,  577;  important  to 
Canada,  99,  280,  394;  licenses  for, 
99-101,  384,  386;  goods  used  in, 
308,  377,  378;  English  goods  cheap, 


766 


Index 


FUR 

Fur-trade  {continued) 

59,  98,  281,  326,  394;  Indians  pay 
large  prices,  59;  prices  of  furs,  379, 
380;  cheating,  421,  422;  illegal,  91; 
monopoly,  9;  rivalry,  61,  326,  394; 
profits,  100,  1 01,  376;  French  offi- 
cials in,  53,  54,  102,  326;  Jesuits, 
385,  386;  English,  59,  61,  78,  82, 
90,  91,  98,  125,  126,  131,  281,  316; 
coureurs  de  bois,  77,  92,  146,  153, 
164,  168,  207,  395;  in  Acadia,  326, 
331;  Anticosti,  305;  off  Labrador, 
307-309;  Tadoussac,  xxxvii,  31; 
Chambly,  90,  91;  at  Montreal, 
92-95,  240;  with  Lake  Indians, 
xviii,  53,  54,  60,  153,  377;  Green 
Bay,  168;  Lake  Superior,  315,  316; 
Illinois,  207;  in  war-time,  241;  in 
Norway,  681;  Iroquois  wish  to 
control,  26,  59,  78;  promoted  by 
Frontenac,  60;  forts  to  control,  131. 

Fusees,  in  fur-trade,  377. 


Gagnon,  Ernest,  "Louis  Jolliet,"  244; 
Le  Fort  et  le  Chateau  St.  Louis,  4 1 . 

—  Phileas,  Essai  de  Bibliographie  Cana- 
dienne,  lii. 

Galette,  iocation,  86. 

Game,  in  Newfoundland,  332;  wild 
fowl  numerous  in  Canada,  109,  no; 
wood  fowl  used  as  food,  482.  See 
also  the  several  birds  and  animals. 

Ganeausse,  location,  122;  Indian  village, 
121;  Cayuga  mission,  70. 

Ganondaoe, Indian  word  for  calumet,  40  2. 

Gaspe,  significance  of  term,  306;  island 
near,  305;  fisheries  off,  305,  306; 
vessel  from,  259;  present  conditions, 
306;  native  of,  340. 

Gasperots,  small  fish,  35 8;  described, 
360;  used  as  bait,  360. 

Gaspesian  Indians,  language,  339;  num- 
bers, 340;  characteristics,  340;  fur- 
trade  with,  306;  sketch,  340. 


GRE 
Geese,  in  Canada,  350,  351;  color,  350, 

351;  manner  of  hunting,  109;  used 

for  food,  431;  on  River  Long,  183, 

186. 
George    I    of    England,    protector    of 

Lahontan,  xxxiii,  xxxiv. 
George  II  of  England,  lake  named  for, 

.  9I" 

Girouard,  Desire,  Lake  St.  Louis,   224, 

240. 

Gnacsitare  Indians,  habitat,  187,  192, 
193;  language,  747;  characteristics, 
187,  191,  195;  hospitality,  192;  ig- 
norant of  calumet,  189;  manner  of 
hunting,  193;  power  of  chief,  191, 
192,  197;  allies  of  Essanapes,  187; 
enemies,  187,  194;  dread  Spaniards, 
190,  191;  Lahontan  among,  xxiv, 
xxxix,  190—195. 

Gnats,  in  Canada,  352. 

Gomara,  Francois  Lopez  de,  Histoire 
G'en'eralle  des  Indes  Occidentalis  et 
Terres  newves,  307. 

"Good,"  vessel.      See  "Bon." 

Gooseberries,  described,  372;  in  Canada, 
364,  365*  36?>  useless,  369,  372; 
vinegar  made  from,  372. 

Goyogoan  Indians.  See  Cayuga  Indians. 

Grand  Chute,  rapids  in  Fox  River,  1 74. 

—  Portage,  location,  316. 

Grandville,  — ,  captured  by  English, 
243. 

Grangula,  Iroquois  chief,  7;  embassador 
to  La  Barre,  74,  75;  speeches  of,  79- 
84;  dances,  84,  85;  sketch,  74. 

Grant,  — ,  on  courtship  and  marriage, 

45  7\ 
Grape-vines,  described,  368;  in  Canada, 

364;  fruit,  368;  on  Lake  Erie,  319; 

in  Illinois,  206. 
Grave,  la  grand,  at  Placentia,  336. 
"  Great  Lake,"  Indian  term  for  Europe, 

533- 
Great  Lakes,  Indians  upon,  26,  60;  dis- 
coveries of,  60,  4S4;  navigation,  64; 


Index 


767 


GRE 
Great  Lakes  {continued). 

fur-trade,  78;  fish,  359,  361-363; 
claimed  by  French,  78;  forts  to  guard, 
273;  Iroquois  bar  French  from,  218. 
See  also  the  several  lakes. 

—  Mohawk,  Iroquois  chief,  239. 
Green  Bay  (La  Baie),  mission  at,  168. 
Greenland,  birds  migrate  from,  356. 
Gregory.     See  MacGregory. 
Grelans,  in  Canada,  351 ;  described,  355. 
Grelins  episses,  term  explained,  260. 
Grenada,  French  colony  at,  52. 
Groseilliers,    Medard    Chouart    de,    in 

Wisconsin,  177;  visits  Hudson  Bay, 

312;  on   Lake   Superior,   312,    315; 

proposals  rejected   by   French,   313; 

erects  Hudson  Bay  post,  313;  sketch, 

312. 
Gros-Ventre  (Big-bellied)  Indians,  cap- 
tured by  Iroquois,  159;  rescued  by 

Chippewa,  160. 
Ground-squirrel,  described,  348. 
Grouse,  in  Canada,  353. 
Gudgeons,  in  Wisconsin  lakes,  174,  359. 
Guerin,  Jeanne,  wife  of  baron  Lahon- 

tan,  ix. 
Gueudeville,  Nicolas,  Lahontan's  work 

ascribed  to,   xliv,   xlv;    V  Esprit  des 

Cours   de   /' Europe,    xlv;  Atlas   His- 

torique,  xlv;  sketch,  xliv,  xlv. 
Guiche,  Count  de,  sponsor  for  Lahon- 

tan,  x. 
Guiscard,  Count  de,  Lahontan's  patron, 

1 1. 
Guldenlew,  —  de,  viceroy  of  Norway, 

670;    title,    676;    Lahontan    meets, 

671. 
Gulf  of  Mexico,  receives  Mississippi,  32; 

La    Salle's    colony    upon,    xii,    33, 

335- 

—  St.  Lawrence,  274;  cod-fishing  in, 
324;  islands,  324;  traversed  by  La- 
hontan, 30,  3  1. 

Gull-fish,  in  Great  Lakes,  359. 
Gulo  luscus,  hi. 


HER 

Hainaut.      See  Desnots. 

Hakluyt  Society,  Publications,  309,  310, 
312. 

Hale,  Horatio,  "Indian  Wampum  Rec- 
ords," 76. 

Hannay,  James,  Acadia,  330. 

Hanover,  elector  of,  protects  Lahontan, 
xxxiii,  xxxiv. 

Hares,  in  Newfoundland,  332;  on  St. 
Lawrence,  266;  in  Canada,  343;  on 
River  Long,  183;  white,  344,  348; 
used  as  food,  105,  106,  482. 

Harisse,  Henry,  D'ecouverte  et  Evolution 
cartographique  de  Terre-Neuve,  28, 
30,  324;  Discovery  of  North  America, 
303;  Notes  sur  la  Nouvelle  France, 
Hi. 

Harpers  Magazine,  73,  479. 

Harvard  College  Library,  editions  of 
Lahontan  in,  liii-xciii. 

Havre  de  barre.      See  Bar  Haven. 

—  de  Grace,  port  of  departure  for  Can- 
ada, 373. 

Hawley,  Charles,  Cayuga  History,  72; 
"Jesuit  Missions  among  Senecas," 
131. 

"Hazardous,"  French  man-of-war,  260. 

Hazel-trees,  Canadian  resemble  Euro- 
pean, 364. 

Hearne,  Samuel,  describes  beavers,  480. 

Heath-cocks,  Canadian  resemble  Euro- 
pean, 351. 

Hemlock  spruce  (epinette),  365;  de- 
scribed, 371. 

Hennepin,  Louis,  dedicates  book  to 
English  king,  3;  at  Fort  Frontenac, 
70;  omits  mention  of  River  Long, 
xxxviii;  Indians  mentioned  by,  xxxix; 
describes  falls  of  Niagara,  xix,  137; 
Description  de  la  Louisiane,  413;  Ne<w 
Discovery,  70,  77,  131,  145,  152, 
200,  41  3. 

Henry,  Alexander,  Travels.  See  Bain 
(ed.). 

Herns,  in  Canada,  351. 


768 


Index 


HER 

Herring,  in  Canada,  358;  in  Newfound- 
land, 3335  in  Great  Lakes,  3595  used 
as  bait,  360. 

Historical  Magazine,  155. 

Hoffman,  W.  J.,  "  Midewiwin  of  the 
Ojibwa,"  468;  "  Native  Indian  Pic- 
tographs,"  512. 

Holland,  canals  of,  652;  monetary  sys- 
tem, 655,  656;  weights  and  measures, 
656;  inns,  655;  boats,  652,  656, 
657;  wines,  663;  Lahontan  in,  65*- 

659- 
Homer,   read   by   Lahontan,   xiv,    116, 

306,  307. 

Honeoye  Falls  (N.  Y.),  Indian  villages 
near,  131. 

"Honore,"  vessel,  Lahontan  on,  257- 
262. 

Horse-chestnuts.  See  Chestnuts  of  Illi- 
nois. 

Hospitalieres,  at  Quebec,  44. 

"Hoy,"  vessel,  described,  693. 

Huards,  described,  353;  fresh-water 
fowl,  35  3;  hunted,  353;  in  Canada, 

35°- 
Hudson,    Capt.     Henry,    explores    tor 
Dutch,    309;   follows   Danish  pilot, 

309,  310;    discovers  Hudson    Bay, 

310,  311;  discovers  New  Nether- 
lands, 31 1  j  journals  of,  311;  sketch, 
309;   Voyages,  309. 

Hudson's  Bay  Company,organized,  311- 
313;  struggle  with  French,  312-314; 
history,  313-314. 

Huguenots,  persecuted  by  Louis  XIV, 
xlvi;  banished  from  France,  392; 
useful  in  Canada,  392,  393;  Lahon- 
tan's  plan  for,  xlvi. 

Humming  birds  (Oiseau  Mouche),  in 
Canada,  350;  described,  354. 

Huron  (Petun,  or  Tobacco,  Tionntate) 
Indians,  154,  461;  English  name  for, 
155;  stock,  321;  habitat,  73,  143, 
153-155,  340,  418,  484;  character- 
ized, 415;  clans,  4615  language,  46, 


ILL 

Huron  Indians  (continued). 

47,  339,  340,  733,  747,  74^5  num- 
bers, 340;  villages,  340,  418;  totems, 
511 }  burial  customs,  473;  inheri- 
tance, 461;  cultivate  fields,  xx,  148; 
hunting  grounds,  319;  government, 
499;  calendar,  427,  428;  missions 
to,  46,  48,  318,  340;  missions  de- 
stroyed, 48,  153,  155,  318;  in  trade, 
81,  92,241;  visited  by  Champlain, 
219;  Duluth,  72;  Longueuil,  74; 
join  Denonville's  expedition,  xvii, 
125;  relationswith  Iroquois,  73,140- 
143,  149,  153,  155,  l65,  3X3  34°, 
502;  desire  French  fort,  xvii,  132; 
relations  with  Ottawa,  146,  397;  chief 
Adario,  9,  149;  dispose  of  captive*, 
144;  tribal  chief,  461;  at  Lorette, 
46,  48,  268,  269;  at  Gaintsouan, 
484;  at  Mackinac,xx,  145,  147,  155; 
anecdote,45  5 ;  battle  with  Americans, 
461;    remnant    extant,    48;    sketch, 

155,  34o. 
Huron  County  (Ont.),  154. 
Huronia,  location,  488. 
Hyporcheme,    compared    with    Indian 

dance,  423. 


Iberville,  Pierre  Le  Moyne,  sieur  de, 
founder  of  Louisiana,  74,  133,  144, 
145,  236;  commands  in  Hudson 
Bay,  217,  313,  314;  subordinates, 
xxxix,  227;  expedition  against  New 
York,  235,  236;  convoys  merchant- 
men, 274;  sketch,  236. 

Iceland,  discoverers  from,  309. 

Illinois  Indians,  174;  habitat,  341; 
described,  206;  characterized,  341; 
physical  traits,  415,  488;  language, 
198,  201,  204,  341;  sodomy,  462; 
berdashes,  462;  totems,  511;  rela- 
tions with  Iroquois,  26,  77,  78,  81, 
82,  198,  486-488,  502;  allies  of 
French,    78,    207;    aid    Lahontan, 


Index 


769 


ILL 

Illinois  Indians  (continued). 

207;  fur-trade  with  French,  146, 
207;  with  Arkansas,  204;  join  Den- 
onville,  125;  La  Salle  among,  26, 
77;  calendar,  427,  428;  sketch,  77. 

Illinois,  early  forts,  xviii,  207;  La  Salle 
in,  33,  77,  207;  Lahontan,  205-207; 
mission,  xviii;  Iroquois  in,  198; 
diseases,  465;  slavery,  169;  parrots, 
354;  chestnuts,  367. 

Indian  territory,  tribes  in,  340. 

Indiana,  Indians  of,  341. 

Indians: 

Physical  characteristics  —  in  gen- 
eral, 282,  414,  415,  465;  robust, 
593-605,  415,  416,  471;  stature, 
415;  color,  284,  285,  415;  com- 
plexions, 430;  unbearded,  282,  284, 
4J4,  584,  5995  longevity,  41  S,  592, 

593- 

Mental  characteristics — in  general, 
415,  421,  423;  endurance,  268,  269, 
416;  observation,  429;  memory,  431, 
438;  independence,  xliii,  11,  59,  82, 
421,  499;  intelligence,  413,  429; 
contentment,  421;  deference  to  age, 
431;  generosity,  586;  faithfulness, 
452;  patience,  475;  politeness,  414; 
reasonableness,  438,  439;  valor,  424; 
not  quarrelsome,  48  2 ;  not  passionate, 
451-453,  463;  natural  equity,  285; 
philosophy,  7,  8,  426;  without  jeal- 
ousy, 451,  453,  460;  without  caste, 
421;  gravity,  424,  425;  brevity  of 
speech,  425,  426;  without  discipline, 
499;  superstitious,  126,  429,  467, 
468;  hatred,  424. 

Philology — in  general,  46,  47,  56, 
58,  176,  73 3>  7345  most  useful,  297; 
vocabulary,  288,  297;  picture-writ- 
ing, 512—515,  590.  See  also  Chip- 
pewa Indians,  Algonquian,  Huron- 
Iroquois  stock. 

Mythology y  Folk  Lore,  and  Religion 
—  in  general,  xxxv,  xliii,  435-445, 
49 


IND 

Indians  {continued). 

518,  519;  compared  with  French, 
5  1 7-550;  idea  of  God,  59.434-437, 
446;  of  divine  justice,  436,  437; 
divinities  of,  445-449;  evil  spirits, 
446-448,  467,  468;  animal  mani- 
tous,  345,  446;  solar  worship,  437, 
449;  dualism,  446-448;  belief  in  life 
after  death,  435,  436,  441,  449,  450, 
460,  472;  in  transmigration  of  souls, 
189;  in  dreams,  449,  459,  460;  cere- 
monies, 286,  448-450;  sacrifices, 
448-450,  501;  hymn,  450;  medicine 
men,  447,  467,  468,  563,  593,  603; 
influence  of,  460;  methods,  467,  468; 
difficult  to  christianize,  146,  413, 
414,  435,  445;  beliefs  compared 
with  Christianity,  517—550. 

Occupations — in  general,  431,  432; 
hunting,  82,  104-117,  319,  349, 
48 1-485, 57 3-575;  fishing,  147,148; 
agriculture,  148,  432;  map-making, 
193,  427.  ^ 

Food  —  in  general,  422,  470,  471, 
580-583;  vegetable,  148,  175,  187, 
202,  369,  372,  502;  fish,  147,  148, 
i6q,  175,  363,  431,  467;  animal, 
169,  170,  175,  187,202,431,467; 
unsalted,  422,  471;  no  salads,  471; 
cooking,  470,  471;  appetite  the 
guide,  470;  drinks,  170,  466,  467; 
avoid  ice-water,  471. 

Feasts — in  general,  169,  170,  422, 
424;  political,  58,  404;  feast  of 
union,  404;  wedding,  458;  for  sick, 
467,  563,  603;  funeral,  473;  war, 
500,  501;  eat-all,  466. 

Villages  and  Cabins  —  villages  for- 
tified, 417;  cabins,  92,  182,  188, 
454;  cabins  described,  417,  418. 

Domestic  Animals — dogs,  105, 349, 
495;  horses,  131;  cattle,  1  3  1 ;  fowl, 
131;  hogs,  131. 

Utensils  —  cradles,  416,  417,  459; 
beds,   418;   traps,    113,    484,    485; 


77o 


Index 


IND 

Indians  (continued). 

anchors,  158;  for  fishing,  147,  148; 
drums,  500;  snow-shoes,  103,  104. 
See  also  Canoe,  Calumet. 

Dress — in  general,  417,  581-584; 
unclothed,  4 1 7,583 ,607-6 1  o;  cloaks, 
417;  caps,  417;  shoes,  417;  made 
of  beaver-skins,  379  ;  of  women, 
416,  609,  610;  hair-dressing,  153, 
416. 

Warfare  and  Weapons  —  weapons 
in  general,  155,  213;  bow  and  ar- 
rows, 94,  115,  514;  clubs,  487,  497, 
498,  514;  casse-tete,  402;  hatchets, 
5125  amazed  at  fire-arms,  188,  203, 
213;  symbol  of  wars,  512;  occasions 
for,  231,232,496;  preparations,  153, 
155,  500,  501 ;  declaration,  507,508; 
methods  in,  128,  129,  142,  497-499, 
502-508;  scouting,  156,  486,  497, 
498;  no  precautions  against  surprise, 
485,  486,  497,  498;  in  forests,  70, 
271,  497;  fortifications,  590;  seldom 
attacked,  237,  273,  490;  ambus- 
cades, 247,  489-493;  track  enemy, 
498,499,  502;  take  scalps,  129,  492, 
493,  502,  505;  personal  following  in, 
500;  private  war-parties,  500;  tree 
of  peace,  407;  cruelty  in,  496-502; 
during  hunting,  485-494,  498;  use- 
ful to  French,  237;  return,  505;  cap- 
ture of  prisoners,  503,  504;  treat- 
ment of,  xvi,  122—124,  137,144,199, 
267-269,  496,  503-507;  running  the 
gauntlet,  238,  505;  torture  of,  xlvi, 
208,  268,  270,496,497,  504;  death 
song  of,  268,504;  adopted,  505,  506; 
exchanged,  194,  195,  506,  507.  See 
also  Slavery,  below. 

Slavery  —  in  general,  94,  106, 
in,  113,  420;  origin  of,  169,  504, 
505;  in  Illinois,  169;  treatment  of 
slaves,  169,  432,  439,  454,  491;  in 
declaring  war,  508;  enfranchisement, 
474- 


IND 

Indians  {continued). 

Government- — without  laws,  7, 
553,  558;  in  general,  xxxiv,  58,  194, 
424,  499,  500;  authority  of  chief", 
499,  500;  under  chieftains,  500,  501; 
council,  75,  79-85>  92~94>  422* 
423;  composition  of,  422,  427,  431, 
499>  5°75  functions  of,  499,  505, 
507;  oratory  in,  xiii,  7,  92,  162; 
treaties,  negotiation  of,  76,  431;  for 
peace,  506,  508,  509;  alliances,  507; 
envoys,  509;  legal  institutions  com- 
pared with  French,  551—570. 

Social  Custo?ns  —  lack  of  property 
distinctions,  xxxv,  xliii,  7,  8,  282, 
285,  420,  454;  scorn  of  riches, 
xxxiv,  196;  aversion  to  money,  94, 
420,  421;  equality,  452,  454;  visits, 
426;  meals,  432;  games,  432,  433, 
594;  gambling,  433;  dances,  422; 
varieties,  423;  compared  with  Greek, 
423;  occasions  for,  423,  424;  of  the 
calumet,  168,  169,  423,  424,  508, 
509;  of  war,  424,  501,  502;  relig- 
ious, 448,  450;  of  the  chiefs,  168, 
1 69,  423 ;  gift -giving,  in  embassy,  84, 
509;  at  fair,  93;  in  marriage,  457; 
for  the  dead,  473;  articles  for,  169. 

Sex  Relations,  Courtship,  and  Mar- 
riage—  in  general,  605-618;  im- 
morality, 451,  453-455.  463,  540, 
541,  615,  61  6;  unchastity,  451,  452, 
540,  541,  612,  615,  616;  courtship, 
45  *>  453_45  7  >  marriage,  xxxv,  xliii, 
605,  606;  monogamous,  458;  con- 
sanguineous forbidden,  606;  with 
slaves,  613;  age  for,  451,  459,  541, 
592;  ceremonies,  456,  457;  fidelity 
in,  453,  458,  460,  461;  punishment 
for  adultery,  416,  460,  607;  divorce 
easy,  453,  456-458;  berdashes,  462. 

Women  and  Children  —  physical 
characteristics  of  women,  416;  pas- 
sionate, 451,  459,  475;  gaiety,  453; 
freedom,  453,  463;  occupations,  432; 


Index 


771 


IND 

Indians  (continued). 

assist  in  worship,  450;  adopt  pris- 
oners, 459;  prefer  French,  455; 
widowhood,  459.  460,  462;  whores, 
463,  464;  child-bearing,  458,  459, 
606-608;  purification,  458,  459; 
children,  highly  prized,  458;  treat- 
ment in  infancy,  459;  take  mother's 
name,  461,  462;  assist  in  religious 
service,  448;  training,  426,  427;  of 
slaves,  474 ;  of  separated  persons, 
458. 

Diseases  and  Remedies  —  diseases, 
in  general,  xxxv,  418,  465-475, 
593-605;  immunity  from,  418,  465, 
475;  carelessness  regarding,  465;  of 
women,  475;  pleurisy,  475;  con- 
sumption, 466;  pox,  465;  natural 
remedies,  467,  468,  470;  sweating, 
467-469,  600—604;  medicines,  161, 
465-475;  of  roots,  466;  of  plant 
juices,  468,  471;  cure  of  wounds, 
471;  avoidance  of  European  rem- 
edies, 467-471. 

Mortuary  Customs — in  general,  47 1 ; 
no  mourning,  472,  473;  wailing, 
472;  funeral  orations,  472;  coffins, 
473;  hut  for  dead,  473;  cremation, 
473;  interment,  473;  presents  to 
dead,  474;  resuscitation,  474;  name 
of  dead  avoided,  473,  474. 

Miscellaneous  Customs  —  heraldry, 
510,511;  totemism,  510;  calendar, 
427,  428;  music,  500,  501;  suicide, 
368,  418,  419,  441,459,  460,  530; 
hunting  customs,  104-117,  349,  481- 
4855  573-5755  hunting  limits,  481, 
482,  496;  drunkenness,  94,466,568; 
excused,  xvi,  124,  466. 

Trade  —  articles  used  in,  70,  71, 
377,  378;  with  Europeans,  574-577. 
590,  591;  annual  fair  at  Montreal, 
92—95;  contracts  recorded  by  wam- 
pum, 76,  431.  See  also  Fur-trade. 
Missions  —  in  general,  xvi,  48,  49, 


IRO 
Indians  (continued). 

55,  56,  59,  II9>  J68.  See  also 
Jesuits,  Recollects. 

Iowa,  Indians  in,  174,  175. 

Iron,  exported  to  Canada,  373. 

Iron-ware,  imported,  375. 

Iroquois  (Iroquese)  Indians,  xl;  origin 
of  name,  58;  English  name  for,  6, 
58;  habitat,  26,  58,  59,  82,  323,  396, 
397;  numbers,  58;  language,  46,  47, 

56,  58,  339,  34-ij  733,  7445  cruelty, 
632;  slaves,  239;  feasts,  404;  women 
commit  suicide,  368;  strength,  120; 
tribes,  58,  323,  341;  government, 
58,  404;  in  warfare,  396,  497, 
498,  501,  502;  name  for  governor- 
general,  80,  82,  84,  404;  canoes, 
138,  147;  physical  characteristics, 
415,  488,  497;  characterized,  26,  59, 
339,  495~5°3j  importance  to  Can- 
ada, 394,  395;  relations  with  Euro- 
peans (general),  6,  58,  5  9 ;  La  Barre'  s 
expedition  against,  xiii,  66-86;  De- 
nonville's  expedition,  xv-xviii,  xxiii, 
118-134,  151,  162,  163,  208,  209, 
221-229;  Frontenac's  war  with,  55, 

69,  23J»  233,  234,  237-^39;  mis- 
cellaneous hostilities  with  French,  xi, 
xv,  xvi,  xxiv,  xxv,  xxix,  xxxvii,  6,  26, 

36,  51,  52»  59-6l»  74,  77,  i°3, 
124,  136,  137,  156,  208,  218,  221, 
223—227,  231,  237—240,  263,  266— 
273,280,  283,  385,  485-494,  504; 
relations  with  English,  26,  58,  61, 
237,  238,  262,  281 ;  at  Fort  Niagara, 
137,  142;  wars  with  other  tribes, 
xiii,  xxii,  26,  51,  73,78,  81,  86,  140- 
142,147,  149,152-161,165,167,198, 
199,  220-223,  317,  320,  340,  395, 
485-493,  502,  503;  in  fur-trade,  26, 
69,  78,  81,  125,  226,  395;  relations 
to  missions,  xvi,  48,  55,  56,  59,  70, 
121-124,  153,  155,  239,  259,  318, 
339,  340;  approve  Adario's  strategy, 
225;  sketch,  26,  58. 


772 


Index 


IRO 

Iroquois  country,  described,  323;  inac- 
cessible, 80;  expedition  against,  149, 
1 52-1 61;  lacks  fish  and  game,  323, 
396. 

Islands,  Allumettes,  in  Ottawa,  216. 

—  Anticosti,  location,  30,  31,  305;  his- 
tory, 3 1 ;  seigniory  of  Jolliet,  31,  243, 
305;  size,  305;  fort,  305;  trade,  305. 

—  Bacchus.      See  Orleans. 

—  Belle,  40. 

—  Bird  Rocks.      See  Island  of  Fowls. 

- — ■  Cape  Breton  (Royale),  origin  of 
name,  324;  described,  30,  274;  gov- 
ernor, 276;  Indians,  328;  coal  ex- 
ported from,  374;  fishery  near,  324; 
unpeopled,  324;  quarries  on,  333, 
334;  sketch,  324. 

—  of  Caves,  identified,  154. 

—  Charity,  in  Saginaw  Bay,  143,  318, 
319. 

—  aux  Coudres,  origin  of  name,  3 1 ; 
danger  off,  250;  passed  by  Lahontan, 
31,  250,  261. 

—  Drummond  (Detour,  Pontaganipy), 
Indian  name  for,  153;  location,  153; 
sketch,  153. 

—  Fitzwilliam,  identified,  154. 

—  of  Fowls  (Bird  Rocks),  sighted,  30; 
location,  31. 

—  Gaudeloupe,  commerce  with,  374; 
sugar-refineries,  374. 

—  Goat  (aux  Chevres),  in  Basin  of  Port 
Royal,  331. 

—  Hare  (au  Lievres),  location,  261. 
■ —  Mackinac,  location,  146. 

—  Magdalen,  location,  31. 

—  Manitoulin, described,  1535  size, 317; 
Indians,  153,  317,  340. 

—  Martinique  (Martinico),  commerce 
with,  374;  sugar-refineries,  374. 

—  Mingan,  seigniory  of  Jolliet,  244, 
309. 

—  Miquelon,  French  possession,  334. 

—  Montreal,  location,  219;  Indians, 
1 19  j  habitants  of,  96,  97;  sacked  by 


JES 

Islands,  Montreal  {continued). 

Iroquois,    224,    225;    fort  on,    240; 
attempted  raid  on,  262. 

—  Orleans,  location,  39,  247;  described, 
39;  mission  village  on,  48;  English 
fleet  anchors  off,  243;  troops  land 
near,  247. 

—  Perce,  location,  323;  described,  305; 
fishery  off,  305,  306,  324. 

—  of  Re,  location,  294. 

—  Rencontres,  origin  of  name,  198, 
199;  location,   198. 

—  Rouge  (Red),  location,  31,  32,  260, 
261. 

—  St.  Croix,  early  settlement  on,  324, 
331. 

—  St.  Helen,  location,  xv,  118;  named 
by  Champlain,  118;  rendezvous  for 
Denonville's  expedition,  xv,  118, 
in, 

—  St.  John  (Prince  Edwards),  origin 
of  name,  324;  lacks  harbors,  3245 
sketch,  324. 

—  St.  Pierre,  French  settlement  at, 
334;  inhabitants  expelled  from,  334; 
retroceded  to  France,   334;  sketch, 

334- 

—  Seven,  harborage  at,  261;  sketch, 
261. 

Issati  Indians,  Hennepin  among,  xxxix; 
branch  of,  343. 


Jansen,  Cornelis,  Dutch  theologian, 
383>  384>  followers,  383,  384. 

Jenks,  Albert  E.,  "Wild-rice  Gather- 
ers of  the  Upper  Lakes,"   175. 

Jesuits,  doctrines  of,  518-550;  accept 
Aristotle,  xiv,  116,  117;  arrival  in 
Canada,  43,  41 3 ;  mission  villages  of, 
48,  49,  56;  missionaries,  91,  129, 
140,  146,  259,  345,  365,413,417; 
relations  with  Recollects,  43,  44, 
383,  413;  mission  at  Tadoussac,  3  1, 
34;  at  Quebec,  42,  43,  259;  Aben- 


Index 


111 


JES 

Jesuits  (continued). 

aki  mission,  48,  49,  329,  330;  at 
Montreal,  55;  Iroquois  mission,  131, 
259,  266,  267;  among  Papinchois, 
340;  among  Gaspesians,  340;  St. 
Joseph  mission,  xviii,  208;  Huron 
mission,  48,  75,  346;  at  Mackinac, 
xviii,  140,  146;  at  Sault  Ste.  Marie, 
xviii,  149,  152,489;  at  Green  Bay, 
xviii,  168;  Illinois  mission,  xviii; 
among  Sioux,  xviii;  relations  with 
Indians,  413,  414,  435,  437,  438, 
496,  73  3  5  describe  native  customs, 
426,  466,  468,  472;  oppose  brandy 
trade,  81,  466;  preserve  morals,  455, 
464;  in  fur-trade,  385,  386;  rela- 
tions with  government,  xxvii,  6,  227, 
231,  381,  384-386;  as  interpreters, 
84>  385;  as  messengers,  149;  rear 
Jolliet,  243;  name  Fox  River,  168; 
Canadian  superior,  56,  259;  instruc- 
tion condemned,  267,  268;  disbe- 
lieved by  Adario,  517,  518;  Rela- 
tions, xxxvi,  xlvii,  26,  31,  47,  58, 
.  68,  76,  82,  no,  124,  127,  152,  153, 
165,  168,  169,  174,  175,  207,  242, 
320,  330,  340,  345,  380,  382,  386, 
412,  414-418,  423,  424,  431,  444, 
448,  450,  457,  460,  462,  466,  468, 

469.  473.  474.  479.  48°>  483.  488, 

512,  530,  603,  733;  sketch,  413. 
Johnson,     Sir    William,     names    Lake 

George,  91. 
Jogues,  Isaac,  Jesuit  missionary,  91. 
"  Joli,"  shipwrecked  offNewfoundland, 

335,  336;  conveys  La  Salle  to  Texas, 

335- 

Joliet  (111.),  terminus  of  Chicago  canal, 

207. 
Jolliet,  Sieur  de.      See  Aux. 

—  Claire  Franchise  Bissot,  wife  cap- 
tured by  English,  243,  244,  249; 
sketch,  244. 

—  Louis,  seigniory  at  Anticosti,  31, 
243,  305;  explores  Mississippi,  200, 


KIT 

Jolliet,  Louis  (continued). 

219,  243,  244;  names  Illinois  River, 
205;  describes  Chicago  portage,  207; 
loses  papers  at  Lachine  rapids,  219, 
244;  captured  by  English,  243,  249; 
trade  of,  305;  in  Hudson  Bay,  244; 
in  Labrador,  244;  sketch,  243. 

Jones,  Arthur  E.,  "Identification  of  St. 
Ignace  II  and  of  Ekarenniondi,"  484. 

Juchereau,  Charles  de  St.  Denis,  com- 
mandant at  Mackinac,  144,  165; 
builds  Ohio  post,  144;  sketch,   144. 

—  Louis  de  St.  Denis,  expedition  to 
New  Mexico,  144. 

—  Nicolas,  Sieur  de  Beauport,  144. 
Jutland,  Lahontan  in,  686. 


KakalING,  Grand,  location,  174;  sig- 
nificance, 174;  Lahontan  passes,  173. 

—  Little,  location,  174. 

Kaministiquia,  French  post  at,  316;  an- 
noys Hudson's  Bay  Company,  316; 
fur-trade  at,  316;  sketch,   316. 

Kansa  Indians, Missouri  mingle  with,  2 00. 

Kansas,  Indian  reservations  in,  174. 

Kaukauna  (Wis.),  location,  174;  his- 
tory, 174. 

Kellogg,  Louise  Phelps,  aid  acknowl- 
edged, lxviii. 

Kennebec  Indians.      See  Canibas. 

Kente.      See  Quinte. 

Kettles,  in  fur-trade,  377. 

Kickapoo  Indians,  habitat,  174,  341; 
language,  341;  village,  174;  Lahon- 
tan meets,  174;  characterized,  341; 
sketchj  174. 

Killistinoe  Indians.      See  Cristinaux. 

Kimberly  (Wis.),  rapids  at,  174. 

Kinnikinick.      See  Indian  tobacco. 

Kirk,  Sir  David,  invades  Canada,  31. 

Kitchi  Manitou,  chief  Indian  divinity, 
445;  sacrifices  to,  448,  449. 

—  Okima,  Algonquian  name  for  gov- 
ernor, 93;  defined,  405. 


774 


Index 


KNI 

Knives,  in  fur-trade,  377. 

Kolnus,  Johannes,  Polish  explorer,  309. 

Kondiaronk,  Huron  name  for  Adario, 

149. 
Kryn.      See  Great  Mohawk. 
Kwapa.      See  Quapaw. 

La  Barre,  Febre,  governor  of  Canada, 
25;  supersedes  Frontenac,  xi,  26;  in 
West  Indies,  26;  in  fur-trade,  77, 
91;  illness,  xiii,  71,  72,  81;  speeches, 
xiii,  77-79;  expedition  against  In- 
dians,  xi,   xiii,    26,  32,  34,  46,  65- 

86,  7^-79.  91.  97.  io3.  I2°.  I25> 
226;  sketch,  26. 

L'Abat,  — ,  French  officer  in  Danish 
army,  674. 

Labrador,  described,  306,  307,309,  310; 
discovery,  244,  307;  trade,  307-309; 
part  of  Newfoundland,  333. 

Laces,  Canadian  import,  375. 

Lachine,  rapids  of,  66,  67,  303;  origin 
of  name,  67;  post  at,  240;  La  Salle's 
embarkation,  67;  canal,  67;  danger- 
ous, 219;  massacre  at  village,  xvi, 
224,  225,  266. 

La  Fontaine,  in  Placentia  Bay,  276,  278. 

Lafontaine,  L.  H.,  "  De  l'esclavage  en 
Canada,"  169. 

LaForest.      See  Forest. 

La  Galette,  location,  68. 

Lahontan,  Isaac  Lorn  d' Arce,  baron  de, 
father  of  author,  ix,  x,  xxi,  150,  151  j 
sketch,  151. 

—  Louis  Armand  Lom  d'Arce,  baron 
de,  parents  of,  ix,  x,  150,  151; 
birth,  x;  sponsors,  x;  destined  for 
army,  x;  joins  marine  corps,  x;  voy- 
ages to  Canada,  xi,  xii,  6,  25-33, 
258-262;  signts  Quebec,  xi,  32; 
quartered  at  Beaupre,  xii,  34-38;  or- 
dered to  Montreal,  38,  46;  visits  mis- 
sion villages,  xii,  48,  49;  ascends  to 
Montreal,  xiii,  49-56;  in  La  Barre' s 


LAH 

Lahontan,  Louis  {continued). 

expedition,  xiii,  66-86, 123;  returns  to 
Montreal,  xiii,  85,  88-90;  quartered 
at  Chambly,xiii,  90,  91 ;  at  Boucher- 
ville,  xiv,  96-1 1  7 ;  ordered  to  France, 
xv,  1 18;  refused  permission,  xvi,  121, 
132,  133;  hunts  with  Indians,  xii, 
xiv,  46,  88,  103-117;  learns  Indian 
languages,  xii,  46,  47,  88;  accom- 
panies Denonville's  expedition,  xv- 
xviii,  1 21-134;  at  Fort  Frontenac, 
xvi,  122-126;  befriends  captive  Iro- 
quois, xvi,  122—124;  censured  for 
humanity,  xvi,  124;  ordered  to  upper 
country,  xvii,  132,  133;  makes  prep- 
arations, xvii,  xviii,  133;  journey  to 
Fort  St.  Joseph,  xix,  xx,  135-139; 
describes  Niagara,  xix,  136,  137;  ar- 
rives at  fort,  xx,  139;  winters  thereat, 
xx,  140-143;  expects  attack  from 
Iroquois,  142;  seeks  provisions  at 
Mackinac,  xx,  1 43-151;  meets  sur- 
vivors of  La  Salle's  expedition,  xxi, 
144,  145,  347  5  sends  letter  to 
Seignelay,  xxi,  1 49-151;  visits  Sault 
Ste.  Marie,  xxii,  152,  153;  accom- 
panies Indian  war-party,  xxii,  149, 
1 52-1 61;  revisits  Fort  St.  Joseph, 
xxii,  155,  161;  abandons  his  post, 
xxii,  xxiii,  152,  163;  retreats  to  Mack- 
inac, xxiii,  163-166;  ordered  to  Can- 
ada, xxiii,  164;  postpones  return  till 
spring,  xxiii,  164;  embarks  for  dis- 
covery, xxiv,  167;  visits  Wisconsin, 
xxiv,  xii,  xiii,  167-178;  describes 
Indian  feast,  169,  170;  among  Fox 
Indians,  175,  176;  ascends  the  Mis- 
sissippi, xxiv,  178,  179;  explores 
River  Long,  179-197J  300;  limit  of 
journey,  xxiv,  193,  197;  descends 
the  Mississippi,  xxiv,  197-200,  203- 
205;  explores  the  Missouri,  200-203; 
burns  Indian  village,  203  ;  meets 
Arkansa  Indians,  203-205,  465,466; 
at  mouth  of  Ohio,  xxiv,  205;  crosses 


Index 


775 


LAH 

Lahontan,  Louis  (continued). 

Illinois,  xxiv,  205-207;  meets  Tonty, 
207;  returns  to  Mackinac,  xxiv,  207, 
208;  disbands  detachment,  209;  re- 
turns to  Canada,  xxv,  216-218;  en- 
counters Ste.  Helene,  217;  rescued 
from  rapids,  xxv,  219;  describes 
Lachine  massacre,  224,  225;  re- 
ceives furlough,  xxv,  230;  counter- 
manded, xxv,  230;  patronized  by 
Frontenac,  xxv,  230,  232,  237,  281; 
declines  Iroquois  embassy,  xxv,  237- 
239;  illness  of,  238;  on  detachment, 
240;  sent  to  France  with  tidings, 
xx vi,  250;  in  France,  xxvi,  252— 
257;  finds  estates  sequestered,  xxvii, 
xxxiii,  151,  230,  252,  253;  attempts 
to  recover,  253;  receives  military 
order,  xxvi,  253,  254,  257;  desires 
a  benefice,  xxvii,  254;  solicits  favor 
at  court,  256;  commended  to  Fron- 
tenac, xxix,  256,  257;  appointed 
captain,  xxvi,  257;  returns  to  Canada, 
257;  arrives  in  Quebec,  xxviii,  262, 
708;  marriage  arranged,  xxvii,  388— 
390;  declines,  xxviii,  389,  390;  plans 
defense,  xxix,  xlv,  271-273;  Fron- 
tenac commends,  xxix,  273,  274; 
sent  to  France,  xxix,  274-279;  aids 
in  defense  of  Placentia,  xxix,  275, 
276,  278,281;  praises  English  valor, 
279;  praised  by  English,  281 ;  project 
rejected  at  court,  280,  281,  288; 
made  lieutenant  of  Newfoundland, 
xxx,  281;  dispute  with  physician, 
282-286;  embarks  for  Placentia, 
287;  incurs  Brouillon's  enmity,  xxxi, 
12,  287-294,  694,  695;  builds 
house,  288,  292;  entertains,  290; 
attempts  to  conciliate  Brouillon,  291, 
292;  composes  satiric  song,  xxxi, 
293;  supported  by  Placentians,  xxxi, 
292—294;  in  danger,  xxxi,  293;  es- 
capes, xxxii,  lxi,  9,  293,  294;  voyage 
to    Portugal,    xxxii,    294-296;    pur- 


LAH 

Lahontan,  Louis  (continued). 

sued  by  pirates,  xxxii,  295,  296;  in 
disgrace  at  court,  xxxii,  297,  298, 
647,  694,  696;  sent  to  Rochelle, 
296,  297;  in  Portugal,  xxxii,  619- 
626,  648-650;  letter  from  Lisbon, 
619-647;  meets  Abbe  d'Estrees, 
628;  sees  king  of  Portugal,  629; 
voyages  to  Holland,  648-650;  ad- 
ventures with  English  privateers,  650, 
651;  at  Guernsey,  648,  650;  visits 
Holland,  xxxii,  648,  651-656,  658, 
659;  visits  Hamburg,  xxxii,  648, 
657-663;  attempts  at  reinstatement 
at  French  court,  xxxii,  xxxiii;  letter 
to  court,  xxxii,  xli;  at  Lubeck,  648, 
662,  663;  at  Copenhagen,  xxxiii, 
663-684;  meets  king  of  Denmark, 
679;  patronized  by,  3;  journeys  to 
Paris,  684-694;  passport,  688;  letter 
from  Paris,  684-695;  at  Versailles, 
694;  adventure  with  German  coun- 
tess, 688-693;  returns  to  native 
province,  xxxiii,  696;  letter  from 
Beam,  696-710;  arrest  ordered, 
xxxiii;  escapes  to  Spain,  xxxiii;  at 
Bordeaux,  697;  at  Bayonne,  698; 
at  Esperon,  698;  Dax,  698-711;  in 
Spain,  698-717;  at  Ortez,  710-712; 
letter  from  Huesca,  711-717;  taken 
for  Huguenot,  712-714;  letter  from 
Saragossa,  718-731;  later  European 
wanderings,  xxxiii,  xliii,  9,  730;  in 
England,  xxxiv,  8;  at  court  of  Han- 
over, xxxiii;  befriended  by  Leibnitz, 
xxxiii;  defends  English  king,  xxxiv; 
death,  xxxiii;  posthumous  works, 
xxxiv;  characteristics  of,  xi,  xlii,  xliii, 
xlvi,  xlvii;  occupations,  xii,  xiv,  xx; 
humanity,  xlvi,  122-124,  208,  269, 
270;  impartiality,  299,  300;  scorns 
criticism,  10,  11;  tolerance,  xlvii; 
obscenity,  xliv;  skepticism,  285,286, 
438-445,  448;  dislikes  ecclesiastics, 
xxvii,    xxxvi,    42,    297;     denounces 


776 


Index 


LAH 

Lahontan,  Louis  {continued). 

ecclesiastical  tyranny,  xv,  88-90,  985 
belittles  Jesuit  missions,  329;  fond- 
ness for  sport,  xiv,  xx;  study,  xiv; 
wilderness  life,  xxi,  xxx,  xli,  7,  11, 
281;  knowledge  of  wilderness  con- 
ditions, xxv,  xli,  435,  452;  knowl- 
edge of  Indian  languages,  xvii,  123, 
132,  176,  414,  733;  beloved  by 
Indians,  274,  281;  hatred  for  Iro- 
quois, 6  ;  describes  Iroquois,  57— 
61;  satirizes  civilization,  xxxv-xxxvii, 
xlii-xliv;  slanders  women  of  Can- 
ada, 30-38  ;  views  on  origin  of 
human  race,  282-286;  dissertation 
on  witchcraft,  696-710;  exaggerates 
numbers,  237,  249,  262;  keeps  jour- 
nals, 206,  264,  300,  370;  discusses 
difficulties  of  discoveries,  210-215; 
describes  natural  history,  xiv;  de- 
scribes beavers,  170-173;  apochry- 
phal  voyage  to  River  Long,  xxiii, 
xxxviii— xliii;  poses  as  a  discoverer, 
xli;  acquaintance  with  explorers,  xli; 
reasons  for  invented  journey,  xxxix- 
xli;  ignorance  of  Siouan  country, 
342,  343;  skepticism  concerning, 
xxxix;  misfortunes  of,  xlii,  xliii;  ex- 
tent of  travels,  41  8;  patrons,  1 1 ;  fore- 
shadows Revolution,  xlvii;  literary 
style,  xxiii,  xxxiv,  xxxvii,  xxxix ; 
Algonquian  dictionary,  732-748  ; 
memoir  on  Canada,  299-400;  table 
of  explanation  of  terms,  297,  301, 
401—407;  bibliography  of  works, 
xxxvi,  li-xciii;  Dialogues  with  Adario, 
517-618;  Indian  participant,  xliv,  9, 
149;  described,  xliv,  xiv;  possible 
author  of,  xliv,  xiv;  style,  xxxix, 
xiv;  origin,  xiv,  xv,  xliv,  8,  9;  apol- 
ogy for,  xli,  7,  8;  published  sepa- 
rately, xiv;  borrowed  from,  xlviii; 
Voyages,  xi;  origin  of,  6;  motive  for, 
xxxiv,  300;  first  destined  to  beburned, 
xxxiv,   5;  criticized,    10,   11;   copies 


LAK 
Lahontan,  Louis  (continued). 

kept,  300;  published,  xxxiv;  illus- 
trations, lxii,  9,  10;  correctness 
of  maps,  300;  dates,  6;  vogue  of, 
xxxiv-xxxvi;  historical  value,  xxxvi- 
xxxviii;  neglect  accounted  for, 
xxxviii ;  French  editions,  xxxiii, 
xxxiv,  Hi,  liv-lx,  lxiii-lxxiv,  lxxvi, 
Ixxxix-xci,  xciii,  124,  143;  trans- 
lated into  English,  xxxiv,  xliv,  8,  9; 
English  editions,  xxxiv,  xlviii, 
Ix-lxiii,  lxxxii-lxxxvii,  xcii;  Dutch 
edition,  lxxv,  lxxxvii-lxxxix,  8  ; 
Italian  editions,  xcii,  xciii,  Ger- 
man editions,  lxxiv-lxxxvi,  xci;  ded- 
ication, 3,  4;  preface  lxi,  5-10; 
Reponse  a  la  lettre  dun  particulier, 
xxxiv;  Memoir  on  Fur-Trade  of 
Canada,  xxxiv. 

—  barony  of,  erected,  ix ;  seized  by 
creditors,  x,  xxi,  151,  230. 

—  village  of,  location,  ix. 

Lake  Abittibi,  French  post  on,  342. 

—  Andiatarocte.      See  Lake  George. 

—  d'Angouleme.     See  Lake  St.  Peters. 

—  Assinipouals.      See  Winnipeg. 

—  Champlain,  Indians  near,  59;  afflu- 
ents of,  108;  outlet,  52,  90,  240; 
hunting  near,  xiv,  108-117;  route 
from  New  York,  240;  Iroquois  hunt- 
ing ground,  240;  rendezvous  of  troops, 
240. 

—  Chautauqua,  as  fur-trade  route,  155. 

—  Erie  (Conti),  origin  of  name,  320; 
size,  319;  shores  described,  319—321, 
399;  empties  into  Lake  Ontario,  131, 
304,  321;  islands  of,  321;  depth, 
320;  navigation,  157,  158,  320; 
climate,  319;  portage  to  Ontario, 
321,  322;  boundary  of  Canada,  302; 
trees,  319;  game,  320,  322;  Indians 
frequent,  320;  projected  fort  on,  272, 
273,  321;  Lahontan  coasts,  xix,  138, 
155,  158. 

—  Frontenac.      See  Lake  Ontario. 


Index 


777 


LAK 

Lake  George,  origin  of  name,  91 ;  Indian 
name  for,  91;  route  to  New  York,  96. 

—  Grand  Butte  des  Morts,  Lahontan 
on,  174,  175. 

—  Huron,  92;  shore  described,  143; 
shape,  317;  size,  3165  climate,  316, 
317;  ice,  144,  448;  navigation,  147, 
317,  318;  outlet,  304;  portage,  322; 
course  from  Mackinac  to  French 
River,  218;  islands,  153,  154,  218, 
317;  fish,  320;  game,  317;  Indians 
near,  xvii,  154,  317,  340,  488;  war- 
party  on,  xxii,  153,  154,488;  La- 
hontan crosses,  143,  144,  163;  En- 
glish traders,   125;  forts,  xviii,  xix, 

i39»  272,  3*?- 

—  Machakandibi,  on  route  to  Hudson 
Bay,  314. 

—  of  Malhominis.  See  Lake  Grand 
Butte  des  Morts. 

—  Michigan  (Illinois),  92;  described, 
209,210,  319;  outlet,  143,  145,  146; 
affluents,  208;  islands,  167;  bays, 
317;  passage  to  Mississippi,  178; 
fish,  320;  Indians  adjacent,  341;  La- 
hontan crosses,  xxiv,  167,  207,  208; 
Lahontan  familiar  with,  xlii. 

— -  Nipigon  (Lenemipigon),  location, 
304;  limits  of  explorations,  304,  305; 
fort  on,  136. 

—  Nipissing  (Nepicerinis),  origin  of 
name,  218;  source  of  French  River, 
317;  on  route  to  upper  country,  218; 
Indians  near,  342. 

— -  Ontario  (Frontenac),  described,  322; 
size,  322;  depth,  322;  banks,  322; 
affluents,  322;  Erie  empties  into, 
131,  304;  source  of  St.  Lawrence, 
304;  portage,  318,  321,  322;  route, 
273;  Indians  near,  58,  70,  323,  341; 
expeditions  on,  xiii,  68,  126;  vessels, 
68,  226,  395;  missions,  70. 

—  Pepin,  French  fort  on,  xxxix. 

—  St.  Clair,  Iroquois  name  for,  139;  de- 
scribed,  xx,    138,    139;  beauty  of, 


LAP 
Lake  St.  Clair  (continued). 

139;  Indian  rendezvous,  xviii,   125; 
fort  near,  418. 

—  St.  Francis,  in  St.  Lawrence,  67,  86. 

—  St.  John,  route  to  Hudson  Bay,  244. 

—  St.  Louis,  in  St.  Lawrence,  67,  86, 
219;  described,  240. 

— •  St.  Peters,  described,  51. 

■ — -  du  St.  Sacrement.     See  Lake  George. 

—  Salt,  reported  to  Lahontan,  xxiv, 
194;  inhabitants  of,  194. 

—  Simcoe,  described,  317,  318;  river 
flowing  from,  318;  Indians  near, 
318,  340;  Iroquois  hunting  grounds, 
323;  projected  fort  on,  273,  318. 

—  Superior  (Upper),  described,  315; 
size,  315;  shores,  153;  outlet,  152, 
304,  316;  islands,  316;  climate, 
316;  fogs,  153;  ice,  316;  game, 
316;  fish,  316;  copper  mines,  316; 
navigation,  312;  315,  316;  ports, 
315;  Indians,  315,  342;  fur-trade, 
153 ;  trading  posts,  315,  316;  Duluth, 
315;  voyage  from  Hudson  Bay,  314, 

315\ 

—  Temiscaming,  significance  of  name, 

342;  location,  342;  Indians  near,  342. 

—  Toronto.      See  Lake  Simcoe. 

—  Trout,  on  Ottawa  route,  219. 

—  of  Two  Mountains,  in  River  Ottawa, 
217;   mission  village  on,  55. 

—  Winnebago,  Indian  village  on,  174; 
currents  in,  178. 

—  Winnipeg,  reports  of,  304,  305; 
river  rises  near,  311. 

Lalande,  Jacques  de,  244. 

La  Montagne,   mission  village  at,    55, 

339.  34o. 

Lampreys,  in  Canada,  358. 

Lang,  Andrew,  Myth,  Ritual,  and  Re- 
ligion, 510. 

Lapland,  cape  on  coast  of,  301;  witch- 
craft in,  701. 

La  Plante,  — ,  captured  by  Iroquois, 
224,  266. 


778 


Index 


LAP 

La  Plaque,  — ,  leads  war-parties,  239, 
240. 

La  Prairie  de  la  Madeleine,  site,  240; 
mission  village  at,  56;  besieged,  226; 
French  encamp  at,  2405  attacked, 
240;  sketch,  240. 

Lapwings,  in  Canada,  351. 

La  Revue  Canadienne,  244. 

La  Rochelle.      See  Rochelle. 

La  Salle,  Rene  Robert  Cavelier,  sieur  de, 
as  discoverer,  xii,  133,  210;  at  Fort 
Frontenac,  69;  embarks  at  La  Chine, 
67;  at  Fort  Miami,  208;  at  Niagara, 
131;  accompanied  by  Recollects,4i3; 
describes  Chicago  portage, 207;  meets 
Shawnee,  82;  in  Illinois,  26,  33,  207; 
plundered  by  Iroquois,  77;  discovers 
Mississippi,  32,  33,  88;  among  Ar- 
kansa,  204;  envoy  to  Onondaga,  61; 
impoverished,  69;  embarks  for  France, 
xii,  33;  familiarity  with  Canada,  33; 
enemies,  69,  125;  endorsed  by  Fron- 
tenac, 69;  his  lieutenant,  124,  125, 
133;  last  expedition,  xii,  xxxii,  144, 
*45>  3  35>  lts  survivors,  xxxii,  xii, 
i44>  M5»  .3475  murdered,  33,  115, 
145;  published  accounts  of,  xii; 
sketch,  33. 

La  Touche,  Monsieur  de,  courtier  of 
Louis  XIV,  254. 

La  Tourette,  Claude  Greysolon  de, 
Duluth's  brother,  Lahontan  meets, 
J35>  J3^;  at  Lake  Nipigon,  136; 
sketch,  136. 

Laval,  Francois  de  Montmorency,  builds 
Basilica,  42;  favors  Jesuits,  43;  op- 
poses Recollects,  43;  forbids  liquor 
traffic  with  Indians,  94;  successor  of, 
1 65  j  rigor,  166;  establishes  seminary, 
386;   benefices  of,  383;   sketch,  43. 

—  University  (Quebec),  no;  editions  of 
Lahontan  in,  liii-xciii. 

Law,  Adario  compares  French  and  sav- 
age>  55 !— 592;  former  works  injus- 
tice, 555-559- 


LOB 

Lea,  Charles  Henry,  History  of  Inquisi- 
tion, 704. 

Lead,  in  fur-trade,  377. 

Leagues,  length  of,  513. 

LeClercq,  Christian,  Premier  etablisse- 
ment  de  lafoy  dans  la  Nowvelle  France, 
41  3;  cited,  200. 

Le  Courrier  du  Luvre,  liii. 

Legler,  Henry  E.,  "Henry  de  Tonty," 
*33- 

Leibnitz,  Gottfried  Wilhelm,  befriends 
Lahontan,  xxxiii,  xxxiv;  Epistolas  ad 
diversos,  xxxiii. 

Leisler,  Jacob,  rebellion  of,  126. 

Le  Jeune,  Paul,  Jesuit  missionary,  417; 
describes  Indian  customs,  466,  472; 
on  Huron-Iroquois  language,  733. 

Le  Moyne.  See  Iberville,  Bienville, 
Longueuil,  Ste.  Helene. 

Lentils,  on  River  Long,  191. 

Lepidus  timidus,  348. 

"  Le  Rocher,"  Illinois  landmark,  207. 

Lery,  Chassegros,  Canadian  engineer, 
41,  42. 

Le  Sueur,  Pierre  Charles,  ascends  Mis- 
sissippi, xxxix. 

Levasseur  de  Nere,  — ,  aids  in  fortifying 
Quebec,  265. 

Lewis,  Meriwether,  and  Clark,  William, 
describe  plant,  474. 

Lewiston,  Niagara  portage  at,  136. 

Library  of  Congress,  editions  of  Lahon- 
tan in,  liii-xciii. 

Licences   (conges),   for   fur -trade,    99- 
101. 
384,  386;  reform  in  system,  392. 

Linden,  in  Canada,  364. 

Linen,  Canadian  import,  376. 

Liquor-traffic,  with  Indians,  94. 

Lisbon,  described  by  Lahontan,  lxi,  9, 
297,  619-650. 

Little  Chute  (Wis.),  location,  174. 

—  Rapids  (Wis.),  location,  174. 

Livre,  value  of,  101. 

Lobsters,  in  Canada,  333,  359,  361. 


Index 


779 


LON 

Long,  John,  English  trader,  93;  Voyages 
and    Travels,    93,    433,    457,    510, 

734- 

—  Point  (Lake  Erie),  described,  321; 
Lahontan  portages,  138. 

Longitude,  former  manner  of  reckoning, 
302. 

Longueuil,  Charles  Le  Moyne,  sieurde, 
74;  relations  with  Iroquois,  74,  75, 
77,  81,  84,  224;  ennobled,  74;  gov- 
ernor of  Montreal,  224;  sketch,  74, 
224;  sons  of,  74,  118,  236. 

Lons,  Marquise  de,  sponsor  of  La- 
hontan, x. 

Lorette,   mission  village,   46,   48,   268, 

7-69>  339.  34°- 

Loskiel,  George  H.,  Mission  of  United 
Brethren,  448. 

Louis  X,  king  of  France,  orders  to 
governors,  290. 

Louis  XIV,  friend  of  Prince  von  Furst- 
emberg,  692;  aids  La  Salle,  88;  con- 
trolled by  Jesuits,  384;  persecutes 
Huguenots,  xlvi;  grant  to  Lahontan' s 
father,  ix ;  ministers  of,  5,  254-256, 
338;  aids  Canadian  missions,  55; 
sends  troops  to  Canada,  26;  relations 
with  Iroquois,  77,  280;  relations 
with  Lahontan,  xxxiii,  5,  281, 
298  ;  appoints  Canadian  bishops, 
165;  chaplain,  165  ;  recalls  Denon- 
ville,  227;  orders  to  governors,  338; 
receives  cession  of  part  of  New- 
foundland, 275;  grandsons  of,  227; 
controls  king  of  England,  61. 

Louisiana,  Canadian  founders  of,  74, 
144,  145,  235,  236;  posts,  144; 
missions,  145;  Tonty's  death,  133. 

Loup  Indians,  French  name  for  Mo- 
hican, 90. 

Louvois,  Francois  Michel  le  Tellier, 
marquis  de,  confers  order  on  La- 
hontan, xxvi,  254;  sketch,  254. 

Lower  Granville  (N.  S.),  site  of  Port 
Royal,  331. 


MAC 

Loyalists,  in  Nova  Scotia,  331. 
Lubeck,   Lahontan  at,   648,  662,   663, 

680. 
Lucian,  read  by  Lahontan,  xiv,  xv,  xliv, 

116. 
Lude,  Count  de,  1 1. 
—  Duchesse    de,    Lahontan's     patron, 

1 1. 
Lutreola  <vison,  1 1 1 . 
Lynx,  in  Canada,  343. 


Macaulay,  Thomas  Babington,  His- 
tory of  England,  665. 

MacGregory,  Patrick,  captured,  126} 
sketch,  126. 

Machakandibi  Indians,  habitat,  342; 
language,  342;  characterized,  342. 

McKenney,  Thomas  L.,  Tour  of  the 
Lakes,  64. 

Mackenzie,  Alexander,  Voyages  through 
North  America,  219. 

Mackerel,  in  Canada,  358. 

Mackinac,  location,  xx,  92,  145,  146} 
described,  145-148;  latitude,  145; 
importance,  145,  149,  318;  route 
thither,  xxiii,  207,  208,  218,  219; 
Indians  at,  92,  98,  143,  317,  448; 
neighboring  villages,  144,  145,  340, 
418,  429;  agriculture,  144,  148; 
fish,  147,  148;  game,  147;  Jesuit 
mission,  xviii,  129,  140,  146,  149; 
French  settlement,  146;  entrepot  of 
Northwest,  xli,  146;  security,  147; 
prisoners  shot,  144,  222;  messenger 
to,  144;  commandants,  xviii,  xxiii, 
125,  144,  164,  209;  Duluth  at,  72, 
73;  La  Tourette,  135;  Lahontan, 
xx,  xxii-xxiv,  xl,  xli,  135,  143,  149, 
152,  163-167,  208,  216,  300,  315, 
430;  survivors  of  La  Salle's  expe- 
dition, xxi,  144,  145,  347;  English 
traders  captured  near,  125;  map,  146, 
319;  sketch,  92,  146.  See  also  Fort 
Mackinac. 


780 


Index 


MCL 

McLennan,  William,  "Gentlemen  of 
the  King's  Guard,"  73;  "Death  of 
Duluth,"  73  ;  Patriarchal  Theory, 
462,  510. 

Macoun,  John,  Catalogue  of  Canadian 
Birds,  356. 

Maheu  (Mahu),  Jean  Paul,  messenger 
to  France,  26. 

Maine,  Indians  of,  49,  90,  126,  327, 
328  ;  St.  Castin  in,  xi,  328,  329  ; 
French  post,  327,  328;  fort  attacked, 
236,  237;  celebration  by  Historical 
Society,  324;  Collections,  328. 

Maize,  raised  by  Indians,  139,  140, 
148,  502;  in  Acadia,  325;  Green 
Bay,  168. 

Mallery,  Garrick,  "  Picture-Writing  of 
American  Indians,"  512,  514. 

Malomini  Indians.  See  Menominee  In- 
dians. 

Malouins,  fisheries  of,  308. 

Mandrake,  in  Canada,  364;  described, 
368. 

Manhattan  (Manathe),  location,  6  ; 
route  to,  91. 

Manitou,  Indian  spirits,  345,  603. 

Mantet  (Mantz,  Manteht),  Nicolas 
d' Ailleboust,  sieur  de,  leads  rangers 
to  Fort  Frontenac,  232,  233;  with 
Duluth,  233;  repairs  Fort  Frontenac, 
233;  raid  against  Schenectady,  236} 
sketch,  233. 

Manzanita,     Spanish    name    for    plant, 

474- 
Maples,  described,  366,  367;  in  Canada, 

364,    365  ;    sap,    429  ;    method   of 

making  syrup,  366,  367;  drunk  by 

Indians,  170. 
Marble,  varieties  of,  685. 
Margry,  Pierre,  Decowvertes  et  etablisse- 

ment  des  Francais,  xxxii. 
Marine,    department    of,    in    charge    of 

colonies,  x,  xi,  5,  118,  384;  Lahontan 

in  corps  of,  x. 
Marion,  Fontaine,  shot  as  deserter,  127. 


MEN 

Markham,  Albert  H.,  "Voyages  and 
works  of  John  Davis,  Navigator," 
310. 

Marmot.      See  Whistler. 

Marquette,  Father  Jacques,  companion 
of  Jolliet,  244;  discoveries  of,  xli, 
412;  establishes  St.  Ignace  mission, 
146,  154;  at  Fox- Wisconsin  portage, 
177;  describes  Chicago,  207;  names 
Illinois  River,  205;  Ohio,  205;  Mis- 
souri, 200;  return  route,  207;  map, 
200;  describes  berdashes,  462;  michi- 
bichi,  345;  calumet  dance,  169,424. 

Martens,  in  Canada,  344;  Lahontan 
hunts,  115;  traps  for,  482—484;  skins 
of,  376;  Norwegian  trade  in  skins, 
681 ;  price,  379. 

Martin,  Horace  F.,  Castorologia,  171, 
173,  346,  38°,  479-481. 

Martinique,  besieged,  288,  289. 

Maryland,  emigrants  to,  126. 

Mascoutin  Indians,  174,  341. 

Maskikik,  Indian  remedy,  468. 

Massachusetts  Historical  Society,  edi- 
tions of  Lahontan  in  library  of,  liii— 
xciii;   Collections,  237. 

Masson,  L.  R.,  Bourgeois  de  la  Com- 
pagnie  du  Nord-Ouest,  417,  457,  468, 
483,  500^ 

Matchi-Manitou,  evil  spirits  of  Indians, 
446-448. 

Mattawan,  distance  from  Montreal,  219. 

Maupeau,  Sieur  de,  accompanies  Lahon- 
tan to  Canada,  257,  262;  preferred 
before  Lahontan,  xxix,  390. 

Maurault,  J.  A.,  Histoire  des  Abenakis, 
328. 

Maya  calendar,  428. 

May-apples.      See  Mandrake. 

Melons,  raised  by  Indians,  148. 

Membertou,  Micmac  chief,  328,  414. 

Membre,  Father  Zenobie,  voyages,  xli, 
204. 

Menneval,  Robineau,  sieur  de,  governor 
of  Acadia,  327,  330. 


Index 


781 


MEN 

Menominee  (Malomini)  Indians,  habitat, 
xxiv,  168,  341;  language,  341;  vil- 
lage, 168;  entertain  Lahontan,  xxiv, 
168-171;  French  name  for,  175; 
characterized,  341;  sketch,  168. 

Merles,  in  Canada,  358. 

Merlins,  in  Canada,  352. 

Meules,  Jacques  de,  intendant  of  New 
France,  86;  recalled,  102,  103. 

Miami  (Oumami)  Indians,  habitat,  77; 
migrations,  77;  language,  341;  phy- 
sical traits,  415,  488;  totems,  511; 
characterized,  341;  mission  to,  xviii, 
140,  208;  treatment  of  prisoners, 
504;  calendar,  427,  428;  fur-trade 
with,  146;  allies  of  French,  78,  125; 
Indian  allies  of,  82,  486;  fight  Iro- 
quois, 78,  81,  82,  157,  159-164, 
208,486-488. 

Michibichi,  described,  343,  345,  446. 

Michigan,  Indians  of,  167,  174. 

Michitonka,  Miami  chief,  1 61-16 3. 

Micmac  (Souriquois)  Indians,  habitat, 
327,  328;  language,  339;  chief,  328, 
414;  devoted  to  French,  328;  mis- 
sions to,  328;  characterized,  339; 
sketch,  328. 

Mink,  identified,  in. 

Minnesota,  boundary  of,  316;  Histor- 
ical Collections,  315. 

Minquas  Indians,  identified,  320. 

Mission  Indians,  assist  French,  1 1 9, 1 22, 
239,  240;  enumerated,  339,  340. 
See  also  the  several  missions. 

Mississague  Indians,  habitat,  317;  lan- 
guage, 34. 

Missouri  Indians,  habitat,  200;  charac- 
teristics, 204,  205;  migrations,  200; 
Lahontan  visits,  200-203;  sketch, 
200. 

Mohawk  (Agnies)  Indians,  English  name 
for,  658;  habitat,  58,  59,  341;  lan- 
guage, 56,  339,  341;  Indian  ene- 
mies, 90;  enemies  of  French,  77,  80, 
238;  expedition  against,  55,  59,  224; 


MOO 

Mohawk  Indians  {continued). 

missions,  56,  239,  339,  340;  charac- 
terized, 339. 

Mohican  (Mohegan,  Wolf,  Fr.  Loup) 
Indians,  habitat,  90;  characterized, 
339;  language,  339;  in  fur-trade, 
90;  wandering,  327,  328. 

Molina,  Luis,  Jesuit  theologian,  383, 
384. 

Monroe  County  (N.  Y.),  125,  131. 

Monsoni  (Monzoni)  Indians,  habitat, 
3425  characterized,  342;  language, 
342;  wandering,  342;  at  Sault  Ste. 
Marie,  342. 

Montagnais  Indians,  language,  339; 
tribes  of,  261,  339,  340;  at  Tadous- 
sac,  31;  mission,  49;  trade  with 
Jolliet,  305. 

Montmagny,  Charles  Huault  de,  gov- 
ernor of  Canada,  40,  82. 

Montmorency  County,  location,  34. 

Montreal,  founded,  52,  53,  233;  loca- 
tion, 38;  early  name,  52;  mountain, 
xxxvii,  55,  339,  513;  island  near, 
118;  described,  52-56;  fortifications, 
53,  8  8,  89,  98;  government  of,  52, 
53,  86,  120,  144,  202,  224,  383; 
river  transportation,  657;  courts,  392; 
seminary  of  St.  Sulpice,  55;  Fron- 
tenac  at,  231,  232;  Lahontan,  xiii, 
xxv,  xxvi,  48,  52-56,  88-90,  218, 
235,  239;  Iroquois  raid,  224,  270, 
271;  commerce,  96,  97,  376;  fur- 
trade,92-95;  peace  conference(i  701), 
149;  Adario  interred,  149;  Denon- 
ville  bound  for,  103;  history,  53, 
55;   Historical  Society  Memoirs,  169. 

Monts,  Pierre  du  Gas,  sieur  de,  French 
explorer,  331. 

—  Notre  Dame,  in  Canada,  274;  fish- 
eries off,  306;  identified,  306. 

Montortie,  — ,  French  officer,  86,  87, 
92,  98. 

Moor-hens.      See  Wood-hens. 

Moose,  identified,  103. 


782 


Index 


MOR 

Moracin,  Sieur  de,  French  merchant, 
655. 

Moravians,  missions  to  Indians,  448. 

Morgan, Lewis  H.,  "Houses  and  House- 
Life  of  American  Aborigines,"  418; 
Ancient  Society,  462. 

Mortier,  Corneille,  cartographer,  338, 

—  Pierre,  bay  named  for,  338. 
Mosquitoes,  torment  of,  68. 
Mountains,  Chicchack.    See  Monts  Notre 

Dame. 

—  Pyrenees,  Lahontan  near,  ix,  xxi;  St. 
Castin  born  near,  329;  timber  from, 
150. 

—  Shickshoclc.   See  Monts  Notre  Dame. 

Moyacks,  in  Canada,  351,  355. 

Mozeemlek,  xxxix;  habitat,  193;  char- 
acteristics, xxiv,  187,  193,195,  196; 
enemies,  187,  194;  numbers,  187, 
193,  194;  houses,  1945  mistaken  for 
Spaniards,  192,  193;  appearance,  193; 
refuse  to  go  to  Canada,  196. 

Mulattoes,  in  Europe,  284. 

Muller,    Frederik,    Catalogue   of  Books, 

Maps,  Plates  on  America,  lxxv. 
Mullets,  in  Great  Lakes,  359. 
Murcey,  — ,  French  officer.  97. 
Muskrats  {Fiber  zibethicus),  in   Canada, 

343,  344;  manner  of  hunting,  no, 

in;  price,  380. 
Mussels,  in  Canada,  359;  described,  361; 

pearls  of,  361. 
Myrand,     Ernest,    Sir     William    Phips 

den} ant  Quebec,  249. 


Nadouessioux  Indians.  See  Sioux  In- 
dians. 

Nantes,  Lahontan  at,  264,  279-282; 
brandy  exported,  375;  edict  revoked, 
xlvi. 

Naroutsouat  (Norridgewock,  Maine), 
French  post  at,  328. 

Natchitoches,  early  French  settlement, 
144. 


NEW 

Navarre,  parlement  of,  ix. 

Nebraska,  Indians  in,  175. 

Needles,  in  fur-trade,  378. 

Neenah  (Wis.),  Indian  village  near, 
174. 

Neill,  Edward  D.,  identifies  river,  315. 

Nelson,  John,  captured  by  French,  xviii, 
265,  274;  promotes  Lahontan' s  mar- 
riage, xxviii,  389,  390;  hypothetical 
voyage  of,  311;  sketch,  265. 

Nemitsakouat,  Duluth's  post,  315. 

Nepisirini  Indians.  See  Nipissing  Indians. 

New  Brunswick,  Indians  of,  90,  327; 
celebration  by  Historical  Society,  3  24. 

—  England,  boundary,  323,  400;  In- 
dians, 49,  90,  126,  327,  328;  early 
explorations,  311;  English,  237,  399; 
forts,  236;  raided  by  French,  236, 
237;  French  in,  127,  330;  negotia- 
tions with  French,  385;  Wheler  in, 
289;  fisheries,  399,  400. 

Newfoundland,  274,  275;  described,xxx, 
xxxii,  27,  259,  287,  288,  295,  302, 
305,  308,  309,  332-339>#348,  355> 
374,  401;    early  explorations,   303, 

307,  308;  early  name,  307;  included 
in  Canada,  302;  natives,  309,  334; 
white  population,  332,  337;  English, 
332;  Basques,  308,  333;  French, 
xxix,  275-279,  332,  334;  officers  in, 
12,  266;  visited  by  bishop,  232;  by 
Iberville,  236;  Lahontan  in,  xxx, 
xxxii,  lxi,  9,  281;  storms,  27,  274; 
trade,  282,  288;  maps,  lxi,  28,  30, 
259. 

New  France,  Indian  name  for,  93;  boun- 
daries, 301-303,  400,  414;  physical 
characteristics,  285,  391;  rivers,  64; 
forests,  70;  mountains,  50;  climate, 
xii,  38,  41,  45,  46,  104,  106,  249, 
250;  animals,  104— 117,  343—349, 
481;  birds,  350-356;  fruits,  364- 
372;    fish   and  fisheries,    305,    306, 

308,  358-363,  394;  Indian  tribes, 
339-342,  710;  their  languages,  46, 


Index 


783 


NEW 
New  France  {continued). 

47;  discovery  by  whites,  303;  limits 
of  exploration,  304;  white  settle- 
ment, 31,  303,  331;  Indian  opposi- 
tion, 303;  population,  304;  com- 
merce and  fur-trade,  33,  54,  96,  97, 
99,  101,  102,  235,  280,  326,  373- 
378,  382,  391,  392,  394,  657,  681; 
commercial  companies,  xi,  34,  41, 
91,  253>  3°3»  382;  agriculture,  35, 
39,  55;  navigation,  64,  65;  travell- 
ing, 45,  46,  62-65,  70;  Indian  wars, 
58-61;  troops,  26,  36,72,  119,  392; 
relations  with  Iroquois,  6,  26,  45, 
59,  60,  92~94>  385>  3975  govern- 
ment, xxxviii,  329,  381-393;  gover- 
nors,   xi,   25,    26,    41,    42,    59,    97, 

TI9>  235>  38li  384»  4°4  — see  a^° 
Onontio;  local  governors,  51,  382, 
383;  intendants,  41,  42,  44,  102, 
103,  239,  382,  384,  392;  sover- 
eign council,  41,  42,  44,  45,  230, 
382,  385,  402;  judiciary,  44,  45, 
392;  noblesse,  98,  260,  386;  seig- 
niories, 26,  34,  395  feudalism,  34, 
36,  53,  260;  land  allotments,  36; 
luxury,  55,  97,  391,  392;  Indian 
allies,  26,  92-95,  119,  270-272; 
ecclesiastics,  42,  43,  383,  386,  542- 
545;  habitants,  xii,  xxxviii,  34-38, 
49>  387>  39J>  399>  402;  manufac- 
tures, 392;  invaded  by  Kirk,  31; 
Phips's  expedition,  242-250;  capital, 
39-44,  331;  histories,  412,  413. 

—  Holland.     See  New  York. 

—  Mexico,  French  exploration  towards, 
144;  inhabitants  of,  191. 

—  York  (New  Holland,  New  Nether- 
lands), Indian  name  for,  82,  236; 
boundaries,  6;  discovery,  311;  route 
from  Canada  to,  90,  91;  incite  Iro- 
quois against  French,  237;  Canadian 
raid,  235,  236;  troops  to  invade 
Canada,  240;  French  negotiations, 
3855  governors,   61,   78,    79,    157, 


NOR 

New  York  (continued). 

287;  fur-trade,  126,  395-397,  3995 
editions  of  Lahontan  in  Public  Lib- 
rary, liii-xciii;  in  Historical  Society 
Library,  liii-xciii;  Colonial  Docu- 
ments, 68,  72,  74,  86,87,  I26,  131, 
J36>  J39>  x55»  !57,  162,  220,  222, 
236,  237,  240,  241,  262,  271,  327, 
461,  486;  State  Paleontologist's 
Report,  305. 

—  York  City  (Manathe),  name  for,  6; 
French  prisoner  at,  239;  easy  to  cap- 
ture, 239;  Adario  in,  519. 

Niagara,  location,  131;  fort  at,  131; 
Lahontan  leaves,  xix,  135,  220; 
portage,  xix,  136;  Seneca  village, 
1  37;  troops  near,  73. 

— -Falls  of,  first  described,  xix,  136, 
137;  beasts  and  fish  killed  in,  137; 
passage  under,  137. 

Nicolet,  Jean,  French  explorer,  209, 
244. 

Nicolas,  Huron  chief,  revolts,  461. 

Nicollet,  I.  N.,  American  explorer,  xl. 

Nicotiana  tabacum,  474;  rustica,  474. 

Nider,  — ,  Formicarius,  703,  704. 

Nightingales,  in  Canada,  350,  354. 

Niles  (Mich.),  French  fort  near,  208. 

Nipissing  (Nepisirini)  Indians,  habitat, 
218,  342;  characterized,  342;  lan- 
guage, 342;  original  Algonquians, 
342;  numbers,  342;  sketch,  342. 

Nopemen  d' Achirini.  See  Achirigouans. 

Noquets  (Nocke)  Indians,  habitat,  317; 
language,  340. 

Normans,  early  fisheries  of,  305;  early 
settlers,  402;  founders  of  Canadian 
commerce,   373. 

Norridgewock.      See  Naroutsouat. 

Norsemen,  early  discovery  of  America 
by,  307,  309;  silver  miners,  681. 

North  America,  size,  xxxvi,  210,  211, 
299,  300;  maps,  300;  explorations 
of  coast,  303,  304,  307,  309-314. 

—  Sea,  channels  in,  658;  islands,   664. 


784 


Index 


NOR 
North  West  Company,  in  fur-trade,  316. 
Northwest  (Old),   not  part  of  Canada, 

302,  303;  Indians  of,  305;  St.  Lusson 

takes  possession,  342. 

—  Passage,  explorations  for,   310,  312. 
Notre  Dame  du  Mont  Carmel,  order  of, 

254. 

—  des  Anges,  Recollect  convent,  44. 
Noue,  Sieur  de  la,  at  Kaministiquia,  316. 
Nova  Scotia,  bays,    330,   331;  Indians, 

328;   Scotch,   331;  Loyalists,    331; 
land  grants,  265;  Historical  Society, 
324.      See   also  Acadia. 
Nut-trees,  in  Canada,  364,  369. 


Oaks,  of  Acadia,  325,  326}  Canada, 
364;  Lake  Erie,  3  19. 

Oars,  described,  65. 

Ochagach,  map  drawn  by,  427. 

Oiseau  Mouche.      See  Humming  Birds. 

Ojibwa,  Indians.    See  Chippewa  Indians. 

Oka,  Indian  mission  village,  55. 

Oklahoma,  Indian  reservations  in,  174, 
175,  202,  204. 

Old  Port  au  Choix(Newfoundland),  30S. 

Old  South  Leaflets,  303. 

Oleron,  St.  Castin's  birthplace,  xxi,  150, 
151,  328. 

Olier,  Jean  Jacques,  founder  of  Sulpi- 
tians,  55. 

Omaha  Indians,  499,  509. 

Oneida  (Onnoyoutes)  Indians,  habitat, 
58,  323,  341;  French  enemies,  77, 
80;  to  waylay  English  embassadors, 
238. 

Onondaga  (Onnontagues)  Indians,  hab- 
itat, 58,  77,  80,  81,  323,  341;  lan- 
guage, 341;  council  house  among, 
58;  embassy  to,  61,  74,  77,  238, 
239;  orator,  74;  chief,  222;  Miami 
raid,  162;  attack  Miami,  163. 

—  French  captive  at,  270. 

Onontio,  title  of  governor  of  Canada, 
80,  82,  84,  404. 


OTT 

Onoyout  Indians.      See  Oneida  Indians. 

Ontario,  boundary  of,  3165  Indians,  317, 
342;  Historical  Society  Records  and 
Papers,  484;  Archaeological  Report, 
484. 

—  County  (New  York),  127. 

Openango  Indians,  habitat,  90,  328; 
language,  339;  characterized,  3395 
in  fur-trade,  90. 

Opossum,  described,  347;  habitat,  343. 

Orange.      See  Albany. 

Originals.      See  Elks. 

Ortolans,  in  Canada,  351,  356. 

Ortyx  <virginianus,  353. 

Osage  Indians,  habitat,  202;  character- 
istics, 204,  205;  sketch,  202. 

Oshkosh  (Wis.),  Indian  village  near, 
174. 

Ossa.      See  Opossum. 

Oswego  County  (New  York),  72. 

Oto  (Otentas,  Otontantas)  Indians,  early 
form  of  name,  200;  habitat,  198—200; 
agriculturists,  xx,  199;  Missouri 
amalgamate  with,  200 ;  Lahontan 
visits,  199,  200;  sketch,  200. 

Otontagan  Indians,  Ottawa  band,  153 

Otreouate.      See    Grangula. 

Otsi  Keta,  Iroquois  name  for  Lake  St. 
Clair,  139. 

Ottawa  (Outaoua)  Indians,  tribes  of, 
!51>  3J7>  34°>  habitat,  73,  92,  143, 
!53>  317,34°j  physical  traits,  415; 
hair  dressing,  153;  language,  176, 
340;  totems,  511  5  religious  hymn, 
449,  450;  hunting  grounds,  210, 
317;  agriculturists,  148;  treatment  of 
prisoners,  144,  504;  characterized, 
503;  calendar,  427,  428;  hunting 
expedition,  143;  first  encounter 
French,  153;  relations  to  Lahontan, 
xvii,  xxiv,  xxv,  132,  165,  167,  177, 
181,  184,  189,  216-218;  relations 
with  other  tribes,  73,  146,  149; 
153-16 1,  209,  317,  321,  340,  397, 
503;  in  fur-trade,  81,  92,  95,  241, 


Index 


785 


OTT 

Ottawa  Indians  {continued) 

under  Duluth,  73;  under  Denon- 
ville,  xvii,  125;  cowardly,  156,  159, 
160,  163,  216,  217;  at  Mackinac, 
145-147,  317,  429;  mission  to,  xviii, 
129,   131,  140;  sketch,  340. 

Otters,  in  Acadia,  326;  Canada,  344; 
River  Long,  206;  enemies  of,  485; 
attack  beavers,  485;  used  as  bait, 
484;  hunted,  112— 114,  482;  price 
of  skins,  113,  379;  Norwegian  trade 
in,  681;  varieties  of  pelts,  379. 

Ouadebaton  Indians.      See  Wahpeton. 

Ouiatonon  Indians,  habitat,  341;  lan- 
guage, 341  j  characterized,  341  ; 
sketch,  341. 

Oureahe  (Ourehaoue),  Cayuga  chief, 
sketch,  233,  234. 

Outagami  Indians.      See  Fox  Indians. 

Outchipoue  Indians.  See  Chippewa 
Indians. 


Pacific  Ocean,  rivers  flowing  to,  200; 
discovery  of  route  to,  xxxix. 

Paltsits,  Victor  Hugo,  Bibliography  of 
Lakontan,  xxxvi,  xlviii,  xlix,  li-xciii; 
of  Hennepin,  xlix. 

Paneasse  Indians,  tribe  of  Pawnee,  200. 

Panetouka  Indians,  tribe  of  Pawnee, 
200. 

Panimaha  (Pawnee,  Loup)  Indians,  tribe 
of  Pawnee,  182,  199,  200. 

Papinachois  Indians,  significance  of 
name,  261;  habitat,  261,  340;  lan- 
guage, 339;  nomads,  339,  340;  trade 
with  Jolliet,  305;  missions,  3405 
sketch,  339,  340. 

Paris,  parlement  of,  supports  Lahon- 
tan's  creditors,  151,  253;  members, 
257;  churches,  165;  Lahontan  in, 
xxvi,  252,  684-696;  Adario,  536; 
witchcraft,  701 ;  papers  from  archives, 
293;  editions  of  Lahontan  in  Biblio- 
theque  Nationale,  liii-xciii. 
60 


PET 
Parkman,  Francis,  77;  cites  Lahontan, 
xxxiv,  223;  Frontenac,  45,  77,  124, 
126,  223,  234,  241,  262,  381; 
Jesuits  in  North  America,  58,  155, 
4185  La  Salle,  xxxiv,  61,  136,  145, 
205;   Old  Regime,  34,  37,  217,  385. 

—  Club  (Milwaukee),  Papers,  133,  312. 
Parrots  (Paroquets), in  Canada,35o,354. 
"Partridge"  (Akouessan),  Indian  name 

for  Longueuil,  74,  77,  81,  84. 

Partridges,  described,  350,  351,  353, 
355,  356;  numbers,  106,  356;  in 
Newfoundland,  332;  used  for  Indian 
food,  431. 

Passage  Courant.     See  Strait  of  Canso. 

Passamaquoddy  Indians,  328.  See  also 
Abenaki. 

Pau,  parlement  of,  150,  707,  712,  713. 

Pawnee  Indians,  sketch,  199,  200. 

Pearls,  in  St.  Lawrence  River,  361. 

Pears,  in  Canada,  367. 

Pease,  raised  by  Indians,  148;  at  Green 
Bay,  168;  on  River  Long,  187;  ex- 
ported, 367,  373. 

Pelicans,  in  Canada,  350. 

Peltrie,  Madame  de  la,  patroness  of 
Ursulines,  44. 

Pemaquid  (Me.),  birthplace  of  Phips, 
244;  projected  attack  on,  265,  274. 

Pennsylvania,  Indians  of,  320. 

Penobscot  Indians,  328.  See  also  Abe- 
naki. 

Pentagoet,  French  fort  at,  xxviii,  328. 

Peoria  (111),  fort  near,  207. 

Perce  Rock,  fishing  village  at,  305.  See 
also  Isle  Perce. 

Perch,  in  Mississippi  River,  359. 

Perrot,  Francois  Marie,  governor  of 
Montreal,  53;  of  Acadia,  53,  327, 
330;  succeeded  by  Callieres,  86  j 
yields  to  English,  327;  sketch,  53. 

—  Nicolas,  French  explorer,  xxxix,  xli; 
Memoir e,  379. 

Perusse-trees,  365;  described,  371. 
Petit  Nord,  fisheries,  308,  334. 


786 


Index 


PET 

Petronius,  Lahontan' s  copy  mutilated, 
xv,  89,  90. 

Petun  Indians.      See  Huron  Indians. 

Pheasants,  in  Canada,  3  5 o,  3  5  3 ;  on  Lake 
Erie,  322;  River  Long,  180. 

Phips,  Sir  William,  attack  on  Quebec, 
xxvi,  242-250;  captures  Port  Royal, 
244,  327,  330;  governor  of  Massa- 
chusetts, 244,  289;  sketch,  244. 

Phoca  vitulina,  349. 

Pickerel,  in  Fox  River,  174. 

Pigeons  (wild),  numerous  in  Canada, 
109,  no,  350,  351;  migration,  109, 
112. 

Pike,  in  Canada,  358;  in  Mississippi, 
359;  Wisconsin  Lakes,  174. 

Pilling,  James  Constantine,  Bibliography 
of  Algonquian  Languages,  Hi,  734. 

Pine  trees,  in  Canada,  365,  370. 

Pineapples,  in  Canada,  364. 

Pingo,  Captain  — ,  commands  "Tem- 
pest," 26. 

Pipestone  (Minn.),  quarries  at,  76. 

Piquer  de  fond,  65. 

Pirates,  in  Atlantic,  296,  327,  374. 

Pirogues,  on  River  Long,  187,  188,  193. 

Placentia  (Newfoundland),  location^  35; 
harbor,  335,  336,  338;  fisheries,  336, 
3  37,  374}  fortified,  275-278,  282, 
288,  289,  334,  335,  348;  popula- 
tion, 336—338;  Lahontan  at,  xxix, 
xxxi,  xxxii,  275-279,  287—290,  292, 
294,  295,  621,  694;  English  attack, 
xxix,  275-278,  281;  natives,  309; 
governors,  xxix,  276,  292,  337; 
sketch,  275. 

Plaice,  in  Canada,  358. 

Platina,  Bartolommeo  de  Sacchis,  Vita 
Pontificium,  703,  704. 

Plovers,  in  Canada,  351. 

Plum  trees,  on  Lake  Erie,  319. 

Plums,  described,  367. 

Plungeons,  in  Canada,  350,  351. 

Poagan,  Indian  name  for  calumet,  402. 

Podophyllum  peltatutn,  368. 


POR 
Pointe  Verte,  in  Placentia  harbor,  278, 

336. 
Pole-cats,  in  Canada,  344;  price  of  skins, 

380. 
"Poli,"  commanded  by  Iberville,  274. 
Pontchartrain,  Jerome  Phelypeaux,  count 

de,  opposes  Lahontan,  5,10;  sketch,  5. 

—  Louis  Phelypeaux,  count  de,  opposes 
Lahontan,  xxvi,  xxx,  xxxii,  5, 10,  252, 
254>  273>  28o>  28i,  338,  647,  688, 
694-696;  sketch,  5. 

—  Madame  de,  xxix,  257,  390. 
Pontiac,  Ottawa  chief,  149,  340. 
Pope,  Joseph,  Jacques  Cartier,  303. 
Popular  Science  Monthly,  76. 
Porcelain.      See  Wampum. 
Porcupine,  in  Canada,  in,  112,  344. 
Porphry,  in  Canada,  43;  on  Cape  Breton 

and  Newfoundland,  333. 
Porpoises,  described,  358,  360. 
Port  au  Basques  (Newfoundland),  333. 

—  Nelson,  named  by  Button,  311. 

—  Ontario  (New  York),  72. 

—  Royal  (Annapolis),  265;  location, 
330,  331;  described,  330;  founded, 
324,  328,  330,  331;  harbor,  330, 
331;  basin,  330,  331;  poorly  forti- 
fied, 327,  330;  captured  by  Phips, 
244,  327,  330;  fur-trade,  3 3 1 ;  popu- 
lation, 330,  331;  tercentenary  cele- 
brated, 324,  331;  sketch,  330. 

—  Royal  (France),  retreat  of  Jansenists, 
384. 

Portugal,  described,  9;  climate,  642; 
manners  and  customs,  619-6475  cos- 
tumes, 641;  inns,  627,  628,  634; 
food,  627,  634,  635;  wine,  635; 
literature,  638,  639;  music,  640,  641; 
religion,  639;  Inquisition,  xlvi,  631, 
632;  monks,  632,  633,  639;  law, 
642,  643,646;  army  and  navy,  643— 
645;  sailors,  650;  pay  of  officers, 
644;  use  of  titles,  621,  629,  641; 
royal  order,  647;  weights  and  meas- 
ures,   646;    monetary  system,   645, 


Index 


787 


POR 

Portugal  (continued). 

646;  transportation  methods,  633, 
634;  colonies,  282,  284;  women 
wear  veils,  636;  behind  gratings,  634; 
morality  of,  635-638;  witchcraft  in, 
701;  mulattoes,  284;  Lahontan  in, 
xxxii,  lxi,  282-287,  294- 29<>,  619; 
cartography,  376;  Portuguese  in  New- 
foundland, 333. 

Porzana  Carolina,  no. 

Pot,  French  liquid  measure,  430. 

Potawatomi  (Pouteouatami,  Pouteout- 
ami)  Indians,  Algonquian  tribe,  398; 
habitat,  xxiv,  167,  168,  341,  398; 
language,  341 ;  totems,  511;  villages, 
168;  bay  named  for,  167;  at  war 
with  Iroquois,  167;  Lahontan  with, 
xxiv,  168-171;  sketch,  168;  charac- 
terized, 341. 

Portachua.      See  Old  Port  au  Choix. 

Portage  (land  carriage),  described,  404; 
at  Chicago,  xxiv,  207;  Fox-Wiscon- 
sin described,  177,  178;  history,  177, 
178;  Lahontan  at,  xxiv,  177;  canal, 
177;  Grand,  316;  from  Lake  Erie, 
155;  of  Toronto,  273;  au  Vase 
(Ottawa  route),  219. 

Portland  (Me.),  fort  on  site,  237. 

Portneuf,  Jacques  Robineau,  sieur  de, 
leads  raid  into  Maine,  236,  237; 
seigniory,  260;  seigniory  harborage, 
261;  son,  330;  sketch,  237,  260. 

Poterie,  Le  Neuf  de  la,  Canadian  no- 
blesse, 260. 

Poutrincourt,  Jean  de  Biencourt,  sieur 
de,  French  explorer,  331. 

Powder,  in  fur-trade,  377. 

Powell,  JohnW.,  "Linguistic  Families 
of  North  America,"  47;  "Mythol- 
ogy of  North  American  Indians," 
435;  "Wyandot  Government," 
499,  500. 

Pownall,  J.,  quoted,  155. 

Prices,  of  Indian  products,  148. 

Prince  Society,  Publications,  312. 


RAC 
Prowse,  D.  W.,  History  of  Newfound- 
land, 334. 
Ptolemy,  Claudius,  early  geographer,  302. 
Pulse,  in  Acadia,  325. 
Puma,  described,  345. 
Putnam,  Herbert,  aid  acknowledged,  liii. 
Pyrrho,  Greek  philosopher,  414. 
Pyrricha,  compared  to  Indian  dance,  423. 


Quail,  in  Canada,  353. 

Quapaw  Indians,  habitat,  204. 

Quebec  (Kebec),  founded,  303,  3315 
described,  xii,  xiii,  xxxvii,  39-45; 
location,  39,  40;  plan  of,  41;  forti- 
fications, 40,  41,  263,  265,  266; 
chateau,  xxvii,  40-42,  235,  262; 
intendant' s  palace,  41,  42,  243,  244, 
392;  bishop,  42,  43,  165,  381-383, 
386,  389;  churches,  42,  44,  237, 
386;  hospitals,  44;  university,  no; 
city  hall,  43;  Jesuit  college,  43,  259; 
Recollects,  43,  44;  feudalism  abol- 
ished, 34;  commerce,  374-378; 
river  transportation,  657;  society, 
xii,  xxvii,  388-390;  courts,  392; 
local  governor,  383;  Frontenac  in, 
230,  231;  Lahontan,  xi,  xxvii,  32, 
49,  216,  226,  230,  258,  261,  262, 
708;  Adario,  519;  attacked  by  En- 
glish, 44,  118,  242-250;  letter  from, 
25;  archives,  304;  editions  of  Lahon- 
tan in  legislative  library,  liii-xciii. 

Queylus,  Gabriel,  Sulpitian  superior,  55. 

Quinte,  Indian  village,  121,  122. 

Quiros,  Francesco  Bernado  de,  Spanish 
diplomat,  n,  12. 

Quoddy  Indians,  English  name  for  Ope- 
nango,  90.      See  also  Etechemin-. 


Rabbits,  in  Canada,  343. 

Rabeyre,   Lieutenant  de  la,  burned   by 

Iroquois,  224. 
Rackets.      See  Snow-shoes. 


788 


Index 


RAD 

Radisson,  Pierre  Esprit,  in  Wisconsin, 
1775  visits  Hudson  Bay,  312;  on 
Lake  Superior,  312,  315;  French 
reject  proposals,  313;  goes  over  to 
English,  313;  returns  to  French,  313; 
sketch,  312;   Voyages,  312. 

Rails,  in  Canada,  no,  350. 

Raisins,  on  Missouri  River,  202;  on 
Illinois,  206. 

Rangifer  caribou,  107. 

Rapids,  Allumettes  (Ottawa),  216. 

Raspberries,  in  Canada,  365,  372. 

Rat,  Huron  chief.     See  Adario. 

Rattlesnakes,  in  Canada,  352,  357. 

Ravens,  in  Canada,  350,  352. 

Read,  John  M.,  Historical  inquiry  con- 
cerning Henry  Hudson,  309. 

Recollects  (Recollets),  Franciscan  mis- 
sionaries, xxxvi ;  early  Canadian 
service,  31,  43,  44,  55,  70,  413; 
opposed  by  Laval,  43;  by  Jesuits, 
43.  44.  383>  4I3i  supported  by 
Frontenac,  413;  aid  La  Salle,  144, 
145;  relations  with  Lahontan,  xxxi, 
290-293;  opinion  of  Indians,  413, 
414;  sketch,  44,  413. 

Reid  Transinsular  Railroad,  Newfound- 
land,  333. 

Reindeer.      See  Caribou. 

Religion,  Jesuit  and  savage  compared, 

5i7-55°- 
Renard  Indians.      See  Fox  Indians. 
Repentigny.  Jean  Paul  le  Gardeur,  sieur 

de  St.  Pierre  de,  at  Mackinac,  208, 

209;   messenger  to  Fort  Frontenac, 

226  ;  sketch,  209. 
Revenclaw,  Count  de,  Danish  minister, 

670. 
Ribbons,  Canadian  import,  375. 
Richelieu,    Cardinal   Armand   Jean   du 

Plessis,  establishes  feudalism  in  Can- 
_  ada,  34. 
Rigauville.      See  Bergeres. 
River  Abittibi,  located,  342. 
—  of  Algonkins.      See  Ottawa. 


RIV 
River  Allegheny,  portages  to, 1 5  5 ;  Wash- 
ington's  embassy,  209. 

—  Arkansas,  Indians  of,  204. 

—  Aspe,  valley  of,  716. 

—  Aspree,  shipping  on,  660. 

—  Au  Sable  (Mich.),  described,  143. 

—  Bagouasch,  location,  315. 

—  Bois  Brule,  Indian  rendezvous,  315. 

—  Cannon,  identified  as  River  Long, 
xl. 

—  de  la  Chaudiere,  village  on,  49. 

—  Chicago,  drainage  canal,  207. 

—  Conde,  described,  321;  identified, 
155;  fort,i55, 156;  convenience,  399. 

—  Creuse  (Deep),  part  of  Ottawa,  216, 
219. 

—  Des  Moines  (Otentas),  identified  as 
River  Long,  xl;  described,  199,  200; 
Indians,  199,  200;  fish,  363. 

—  Detroit,  described,  161;  islands,  139, 
161;  war-party  on,  155,  161;  fort, 
139;  Lahontan  passes,  138. 

—  Divine.      See  Illinois. 

—  Du  Fer,  affluent  of  Hudson,  91. 

—  Ebro,  Saragossa  on,  719;  navigable, 

7^5- 

—  Elbe,  mouth  of,  659;  tide,  659;  ship- 
ping, 660;  Hamburg  on,  659,  660; 
Glucstat,  688. 

—  Famine,  location,  72  ;  La  Barre's 
expedition  at,  xiii,  72-79;  salmon, 
74;  Adario's  ambuscade,  223. 

—  Fox  (Puants,  Renards),  Lahontan 
describes,  xxiv,  xlii,  168,  173,  174; 
Indian  villages,  168;  French  names 
for,  168;  Jesuit  mission,  168;  fertil- 
ity of  banks,  168;  navigation  of, 
174,  177,  178;  beaver  in,  481. 

—  French,  origin  of  name,  218;  de- 
scribed, 317;  route  to  upper  country, 
218;  navigation  difficult,  218;  fort 
advised,  399. 

—  Genessee,  outlet  of,  322;  Seneca 
near,  137;  vessels  to  visit,  395. 

—  Grand,  near  Lake  Ontario,  321,  322, 


Index 


789 


RIV 

River  Grand  (Mo.),  Indian  village  at 
mouth,  200. 

Hudson  (Manathe,  Manhattan),  loca- 
tion, 7;  Indians  upon,  90;  connects 
with  Canada,  91. 

—  Humber,  on  Toronto  portage  route, 

3l8'  ,        •     , 

—  Illinois  (Seignelay),  described,  205, 

206;  early  name  for,  205;  navigation, 
205;  game  on  banks,  206;  fruit,  206; 
forts,  207;  portage,  207;  Lahontan 
at  mouth,  xxiv,  205-207. 

—  Kennebec,  boundary  of  New  En- 
gland, 323;  Englishman  captured  on, 
265;  French  missions,  329,  330. 

—  Lemipisaki,  identified,  315. 

—  au  Lievre,  tributary  of  Ottawa,  217. 

—  Lima,  Viana  on,  621. 

—  Lisbon  (O  Rey  dos  Rios),  tide  in, 
641. 

—  Loire,  279. 

—  Long,  described,  xxiv;  source,  193; 
affluent  of  Mississippi,  167,  179; 
shores  barren,  189,  190,  197;  fish 
and  game,  179,  183,  197,  206,  363; 
navigation,  179,  197;  Lahontan' s 
alleged  journey  to,  xxiii,  xxiv, 
xxxviii-xliii,  1 79-197?  3OI>  4I4» 
limits  of  Lahontan' s  voyage,  xxiv, 
190;  regarded  as  fictitious,  xxiii, 
xxxviii,  xxxix ;  proposed  identifica- 
tions, xxxix,  xl;  on  maps,  xxxviii,  xlv, 
301. 

—  du  Loup,  location,  51. 

—  of  Machakandibi,  identified,  315; 
navigation,  314. 

—  Maheu,  fief  upon,  26. 

—  Maitland  (Ont.).     See  Theonontate. 

—  Manathe.      See  Hudson. 

—  Manhattan.      See  Hudson. 

—  Maskinonge,  location,  51. 

—  Mattawan,  described,  216,  219. 

—  Miami  (Oumamis),  Indian  hunting 
grounds  on,  486. 

—  of  Miami.      See  St.  Joseph. 


RIV 
River  Michipiciton,  navigation  of,  314, 

3J5- 

—  Minnesota,     identified     with    River 

Long,  xxxix,  xl. 

—  Mississippi,  longitude,  302;described, 

167,  178,  197,  205,206;  routes  to, 

168,  178,  207;  islands,  178,  206; 
fish  and  game,  343,  359,  362,  363; 
parrots  near,  354;  crocodiles,  204, 
205>  343  5  fruit,  367;  Indians  of, 
174,  175,  203,  204,  342,  462,  747; 
early  voyages  on,  149,  200,  204, 
205;  Jolliet,  81;  La  Salle,  33,  88, 
144,  145;  Lahontan,  xxiv,  178,  179, 
197-200,203-205;  Le  Sueur,  xxxix; 
French  fort,  xxxix;  fur-trade,  146; 
western  boundary  of  Canada,  302, 
414,  733;  diseases,  465,466. 

— .  Missouri  (Pekitanoui),  significance  of 
name,  200;  current,  200,  203;  fish 
and  game,  200,  203,  363;  Indians, 
200,  205,  343,-  first  visitors,  200; 
Lahontan  explores,  200-203,  301, 
465,  466;  map,  301. 

. —  Moingona.     See  Des  Moines. 

—  Moose,  identification,  315;  tributary, 
342. 

—  Muddy.      See  de  Vase. 

—  Nelson,  described,  311;  post  on,  313. 

—  Nicolet,  location,  51. 

—  Nipigon,  identified,  315. 

—  Nottawausaga.      See  Theonontate. 

—  Ohio  (Ouabouskiguo),  early  names 
for,  205;  depth,  205;  navigable,  205; 
portage,  321;  boundary  of  Canada, 
302;  Indians  upon,  204;  Lahontan 
at  mouth,  xxiv,  205;  fort  at  mouth, 
144;  parrots  on,  354. 

—  Osage,  Lahontan  reaches,  202. 

—  Oswego  (Onnontagnes,  Onondaga), 
identified,  72,    322;  vessels  to  visit, 

395- 

—  Otentas.      See  Des  Moines. 

—  Ottawa, described,  xxxvii,  95;  rapids, 
216,   270;  islands,  216;  tributaries, 


790 


Index 


RIV 

River  Ottawa  {continued). 

216,  217,  219;  union  with  St.  Law- 
rence, 219;  Indians  on,  98,  323, 
342;  fur-trade  route,  218,  219,  399; 
Lahontan  descends,  xxv,  216—218. 

—  Ouabache.      See  Wabash  and  Ohio. 

—  Ozao,  Laruns  on,  712. 

—  Papinachois,  location,  261. 

—  Pekitanoui.      See  Missouri. 

—  Penobscot,  French  fort  on,  328;  In- 
dians near,  339. 

—  Platte,  Indians  on,  200. 

—  Portneuf,  location,  260. 
— -  des  Prairies.      See  Ottawa. 

—  Richelieu,  location,  51,  90;  trade 
route,  240. 

—  Rupert,  post  on,  313. 

—  Saco,  Indians  of,  90. 

— -  St.  Charles  (Quebec),  41,  42,  44, 
264. 

—  St.  Clair,  described,  xx;  ice  in,  141; 
fort  on,  xviii,  139. 

■ —  St.  Croix,  Poutrincourt  on,  331. 

—  St.  Francis,  location,  51. 

—  St.  John,  described,  325;  Indians 
near,  339;  hunting  upon,  325; 
French  on,  xxviii;  Englishman  cap- 
tured at,  265;  posts  upon,  324,  325. 

—  St.  Joseph  (Mich.),  Lahontan  at,  207, 
208,  210;  La  Salle's  fort  on,  208; 
later  French  fort,  208. 

—  St.  Lawrence,  described,  xxxvii,  31, 
39,  264,  304;  source,  304,  323; 
length,  304;  breadth,  305;  shores, 
26 1 ;  forests,  70;  current,  304;  winds, 
261;  becomes  salt,  323;  ice  in,  xi, 
32>_38>_45>  9°>  232>  249,250,266; 
navigation,  49—53,  67,  122,  261, 
262,  270,657;  affluents, 49,  21 9,  261, 
306;  islands,  31,39,52, 11  8,260,261, 
305;  rapids,  67-70,  85,  122,  226, 
232;  lakes  within,  51,  67,  219;  fish, 
306,  358,  360,  361,  401;  harbors, 
261;  boats  on,  239,  241,  242,  657; 
Indians  on,  90,  221,  223,  340;  early 


ROC 

River  St.  Lawrence  (continued). 

explorations,  303;  voyages  on,  260— 
262,  274;  naval  battles  off  mouth, 
259,  260;  French  captured  on,  243; 
Canadian  boundary,  302;  seigniories 
on,  34,  260;  cities  on,  38. 

—  St.  Louis.      See  Illinois. 

—  St.  Mary,  route  to,  153. 

—  St.  Maurice,  described,  50;  flows 
into  St.  Lawrence,  49,  51;  Indians 
on,  340. 

—  St.  Peter's.      See  Minnesota. 

—  Saginaw,  described,  319;  hunting 
grounds  of,  143,  318;  Indian  murder 
at,  146. 

—  Saguenay,  location,  31;  Jolliet  as- 
cends, 244;  vessels  refuge  in,  244, 
249. 

—  Salmon,  identified,  72,  322. 

—  Sand.      See  Au  Sable. 

—  Seignelay.      See  Illinois. 

—  Taio,  Lahontan  on,  629,  630,  648, 
649. 

—  Tanaouate,  322;  identified,  318. 

—  Theonontate(Teonontate),  in  Huron 
country,  154,  318,  322. 

—  of  Toronto,  outlet,  322. 

—  Trent,  portage  to  Lake  Ontario,  318. 

—  of  Tsonontouans.  See  Genessee 
River  and  Irondequoit  Creek. 

—  de  Vase  (Muddy),  on  Ottawa  route, 
219. 

—  Wabash  (Ouabache),  early  name  for 
Ohio,  205. 

—  Wisconsin,  described,  177,  178; 
islands  in,  177,  178;  Lahontan  on, 
xxiv,  177,  178. 

—  Wolf  (Wis.),  Indian  village  on,  174. 

—  Yamaska,  location,  51. 
Riverside  Natural  History,  478. 
Roach,  in  Canada,  358,  362. 
Robineau.      See  Portneuf. 

Rochelle,  port  of  departure  for  Canada, 
xi,  xxvii,  25,  26,  40,  119,  120,  145, 
229,  235,  238,  373,  374,  377;  La- 


Index 


791 


ROC 

Rochelle  {continued). 

hontan  at,  242,  252,  257;  harbor, 
294;  merchant  of,  296,  657;  Adario 
in,  536. 

Roe-bucks,  in  Canada,  343;  Lake  Erie, 
320,  322;  near  Detroit,  139,  161 ; 
in  Illinois,  206;  near  Lake  Michigan, 
210;  as  food,  169,  187,  367,  482; 
price  of  skins,  380. 

Rolland,  Francois  le  Noir,  dit,  Lachine 
trader,  240. 

Roots,  used  as  medicine,  161. 

Rotterdam,  Lahontan  at,  648,  651,  652, 
692. 

Rouen,  birthplace  of  Gueudeville,  xliv; 
merchants  found  Quebec,  303. 

Rousseau,  Jean  Jacques,  anticipated 
by  Lahontan,  xlvii;  Discours  sur 
r  Origine  et  les  Fo?idements  de 
V  In'egalit'e  parmi  les  Hommes,  xlvii, 
xlviii. 

Roy,  Edmond,  opinion  as  to  River  Long, 
xl,  xli;  "Le  Baron  de  Lahontan," 
xviii,  xl,  Hi,  37,  151,  257,  273,  279, 
288,  293,  391;  bibliography  of  La- 
hontan, Hi. 

Ruche,  fish  implement,  406. 

Rupert  Land,  Indians  of,  342. 


Sabin,  Joseph,  Dictionary  of  Books  relat- 
ing to  America,  Hi,  lxxv,  lxxxii. 

Sabres,  in  fur-trade,  378. 

Sacacommis,  identified,  474. 

Saco  (Me.),  attacked  by  Indians,  90. 

Saentsouan,  Huron  chief,  141. 

Sagard-Theodat,  Gabriel,  Histoire  du 
Canada  et  voyages  que  les  freres 
mineurs  Recolletsy  ont  faicts,  413. 

Saguenay  County  (Quebec),  261. 

"St.  Albans,"  English  man-of-war,  276, 
277. 

"  St.  Ann,"  Lahontan  in  charge  of,  274. 

St.  Bento,  Benedictine  monastery  in 
Lisbon,  630. 


ST.  V 

St.  Castin,  Anselm,  son  of  Jean  Vincent, 
influence  with  Indians,  328. 

— -  Baron  Jean  Vincent,  sketch,  xi,  328, 
329^ 

St.  Denis.      See  Juchereau. 

St.  Francis  de  Sales,  mission  village,  46, 
48,  49,  328. 

—  du  Sault,  mission  village,  56. 

—  Xavier  mission.      See  Green  Bay. 
Ste.    Helene,  Jacques  le   Moyne,   sieur 

de,  118;  leads  raid  against  Schnec- 
tady,  236;  Lahontan  encounters,  217; 
expedition  to  Hudson  Bay,  217; 
death,  248. 

St.  Ignace,  mission  of,  146,  154. 

St.  John  (N.  B.),  tercentenary  cele- 
brated, 324}  attacked  by  English, 
3*5- 

St.  John  de  Luz,  trade  with  Newfound- 
land, 282,  288}  sketch,  288. 

St.  John  de  Pied  de  Port,  roads,  716. 

St.    Johns   (Newfoundland),    described, 

333- 

St.  Lazare,  order  of,  Lahontan  receives, 

xxvi,  253,  254;  history,  254. 
St.  Louis,  La  Salle's  colony  in  Illinois, 

33- 
St.  Lusson,   Simon  Francois  Daumont, 

sieur  de,  takes  possession  of  North- 
west, 342. 
St.    Malo,    fishers   and   explorers   from, 

308. 
St.  Michel,   — ,   captured  by  Iroquois, 

270. 
—  order  of,  ix. 
St.  Nazaire,   French  harbor,   279,   281, 

287. 
St.  Pierre,  Jacques  le  Gardeur,  sieur  de, 

receives  Washington,  209. 
St.  Simon,  Louis  de  Rouvroy,  due  de, 

Memoirs,  227. 
St.  Sulpice,  Parisian  church,  165. 
St.  Vallier,  Jean   Baptiste   de  la   Croix 

Chevriere,  abbe  de,  bishop  of  Quebec, 

'65,   383;  arrives  in   Canada,   232; 


792 


Index 


ST.  V 

St.  Vallier  (continued). 

visits  diocese,  232;  adjusts  cures, 
386;  intercedes  for  English  envoy, 
246;  sketch,  165,  383;  portrait,  165. 

"Salleeman,"  pirate  ship,  296. 

Salmon,  in  Acadia,  324;  Canada,  358; 
Newfoundland,  333;  Famine  River, 

74- 
Sal--velinus  namycush,  148. 
Sandaouires,  Huron  Indian,  146. 
Santee  Indians.      See  Issati. 
Sasteretsi,  Huron  chiefs,  sketch,  461. 
Sauk  (Saki)  Indians,  habitat,  xxiv,  168, 

341;  language,    341;    village,    168; 

entertain   Lahontan,   xxiv,  168-171; 

amalgamate  with  Foxes,   175,   397, 

398;  sketch,  1 68;  characterized,  341. 
Sault  du  Buisson,  St.  Lawrence  rapid,  67. 

—  des  Cedres,  St.  Lawrence  rapid,  67. 

—  de  la  Chaudiere.  See  St.  Francis  de 
Sales. 

—  Long  (of  Ottawa),  defended  by 
Dollard,  217;  Lahontan  passes,  217; 
Iroquois  battle,  270. 

—  Long  (of  St.  Lawrence),  67,  68. 

—  au  Recollet,  mission  village,  55. 

—  Ste.  Marie,  described,  152,  153,316; 
legend,  152;  Indians  of,  149,  152, 
340,  342,  493,494;  war-party  from, 
xxii,  153;  Lahontan  at,  xxii,  152, 
153;  fort,  149,  488,  489;  mission, 
xviii,  149;  importance,  149,  152; 
sketch,  149. 

—  St.  Louis  origin  of  name,  66;  de- 
scribed, 66,  67;  mission  village  on, 
56,  239,  339,  340;  Lahontan  endan- 
gered in,  xxv,  219;  Jolliet  loses  papers 
in,  219,  244. 

Saulteur  Indians.      See  Chippewa. 

Saurel,  Pierre  de,  Canadian  seignior,  52. 

Savary,  A.  W. ,  County  of  Annapolis,  330. 

Saw-mills,  in  Canada,  371. 

Scadding,  Henry,  antiquarian  of  To- 
ronto, 154,  155,  318;  Toronto  of 
Old,  318. 


SHI 

Schefer,  John,  Lapland,  705. 
Schenectady  (Corlaer),  raided  by  French, 

233>  235>  236. 
Schuyler,    Peter,    leads    raiding    party, 

262;   "Report,"  262. 
Sciuropterus  volucella,  348. 
Scotch,  in  Nova  Scotia,  331. 
Scurvy,  described,  406;  causes,  676-678. 
Sea  of  Jesso,  seeking  passage  to,  310. 

—  ofSaragossa,  described,  9. 

—  Vermillion.      See  Pacific  Ocean. 
Sea-cows,  described,  358,  361. 

—  parrots,  described,  351,  355. 

—  mews,  described,  351,  355. 

Seals  (sea-wolves),  described,  349;  in 
Acadia,  326;  Canada,  344;  hunted, 
31.333;  skins  in  trade,  305,  307-309; 
price,  380;  for  canoes,  307;  consid- 
ered as  fish,  326. 

Seignelay,  Jean  Baptiste,  marquis  de, 
French  minister,  118;  Lahontan  ac- 
credited to,  250-252;  Lahontan' s 
letter  to,  xxi,  149-152;  death  of, 
xxvi,  251,  252;  successor,  252. 

Seigneuries  sauvage,  trade  stations,  325. 

Seneca  (Tsonontouans)  Indians,  habitat, 
58,  127,  130,  131.  137,  323,  341; 
language,34i ;  domestic  annuals,  131; 
arms,  513;  at  war  with  Miami,  162; 
English  should  remove,  399;  enemies 
of  French,  77,  80;  destroy  La  Salle's 
fort,  131;  ambush  Denonville,  128; 
country  laid  waste,  xvi,  130,  131. 

Severance,  Frank  H.,  Old  Trails  on 
Niagara  Frontier,  131. 

Seven  Trumpets,  68  6,  704. 

Shad,  in  Canada,  358. 

Shawnee  (Chauanon)  Indians,  sketch,  82. 

Shea,  John  Gilmary,  translator,  149, 
217;  "Huron  Indians,"  155;  Dis- 
covery and  Exploration  of  Mississippi 
Valley,  204;  Early  Voyages  on  Mis- 
sissippi, 200. 

Shell-fish,  in  Canada,  359,  361. 

Shirts  (linen),  in  fur-trade,  377. 


Index 


793 


SIL 
Sillery,  mission  village,  46,  48,  49,  329, 

33°>  339.  34°- 

Silver  mines,  near  Lake  Erie,  37.2. 

Simcoe  County  (Ont.),  Hurons  in,  154. 

Siouan  family,  tribes  of,  200,  202,  204, 
3°5>  3+2>  343.  398;  migrations,  200, 
204. 

Sioux  (Nadouessioux)  Indians,  signifi- 
cance of  name,  175;  described,  xxxix; 
habitat,  175,  342;  language,  342, 
343;  totems,  51 1 ;  relations  with  Foxes, 
175,  176;  enemies  of,  182,  198,  199; 
war  with  Iroquois,  198,  199;  Duluth 
among,  73;  missions,  xviii;  Lahontan 
ignorant  of  their  country,  342,  343. 

Slavery,  among  Indians,  94,  104,  169; 
among  French  in  Illinois,  169. 

Sledges,  described,  xii,  406. 

Sloops,  described,  656-658;  advantages 
of  Dutch,  657;  cost  of  passage  on, 
656. 

Small-pox,  among  Indians,  595,  603. 

Smelt,  in  Canada,  358. 

Smithsonian  Institution,  Reports,  477. 

Snipe,  in  Canada,  no,  351. 

Snow-shoes,  described,  xii,  103,  104. 

Soap,  in  fur-trade,  378. 

Sokoki  (Soccoki)  Indians,  habitat,  90, 
328;  language,  339;  enemies  of  Mo- 
hawk, 90;  wandering,  328;  in  fur- 
trade,  90;  sketch,  90;  characterized, 

339- 
Sonkaskiton  Indians.  See  Choukasketon. 

Sorcery,  penalty  for,  562,  563. 

Sorel,  described,  52,  90. 

Souffleur,  large  sea-fish,  358,  360. 

Souriquois  Indians.      See  Micmac. 

South  America,  ships  from  refuge  at 
Placentia,  335. 

Southey,  Robert,  Lahontan  memoir  in 
library  of,  xxxiv. 

Souza,  Don  John  of,  Portuguese  gov- 
ernor-general, 621. 

Spain,  Lahontan  in,  xxxiii;  his  letter 
from,  718-731;  war  with,  5 ;  diplomats, 


SUL 
Spain  (continued). 

12;  treasure  ships,   244;  mulattoes, 

284. 
Spanheim,  Ezekiel,    History  of  Casars, 

692. 

Spaniards,  Lahontan' s  party  mistaken 
for,  190,  191;  inhabit  New  Mexico, 
191,  192;  savages  taken  for,  192, 
193;  Lahontan  inquires  for,  204; 
fishery  at  Newfoundland,  308;  port 
of,  308. 

Sparrow-hawks,  in  Canada,  352 

Spars,  used  in  canoes,  407. 

Sperrnophile  tridecemlineatus,  348. 

Squanto,  Indian  warrior,  90. 

Squash.      See  Citrouille. 

Squirrels,  in  Canada,  343,  344,  348. 

Starlings,  in  Canada,  352. 

Sterlets,  in  Canada,  351,  355. 

Stockings  (worsted),  in  fur-trade,  377. 

Strait  of  Belle  Isle,  separates  Newfound- 
land, 309,  334. 

—  Canso  (Campceaux,  Canseaux), origin 
of  name,  325. 

—  of  Dardanelles,  680;  ceremony  in 
passing,  29. 

—  Davis's,  discovered,  309,  310. 

—  of  Detour,  location,  153. 

—  of  Gibraltar,  680;  ceremony  in  pass- 
ing, 29;  ship  founders  off,  2S9. 

—  Hudson,  discovery  of,  309,  310. 

—  of  Mackinac,  described,  147,  148; 
post  on,  xx. 

—  of  Sund,  ceremony  in  passing,  29; 
toll  exacted  at,  679,  680. 

Strawberries,  in  Canada,  365,  372. 

Sturgeon,  described,  156,  361,  362;  in 
Great  Lakes,  316,  320,  359. 

Sugar,  scarce  in  Canada,  369,  374,  375. 

Suicide,  practised  by  Indians,  530. 

Sulpitians,  seigneurs  of  Montreal,  52, 
55;  missions  of,  54,  55,  7°;  semi- 
nary at  Montreal,  55;  at  Paris,  55, 
165;  arrive  in  Canada,  55;  fiefs  of, 
55;  in  New  World,  145;  sketch,  55. 


794 


Index 


SUL 

Suite,  Benjamin,  "Le  Regiment  de 
Carignan,"  36;  "Pierre  Boucher 
et  son  Livre,"  98;  "Pretendues 
Origines  des  Canadiens  Francais," 
37;  "LaRiviere  desTrois  Rivieres," 
5 1 ;  Histoire  des  Canadiens  Francais, 
41,  330. 

Susquehannock  Indians,  321. 

Swallows,  in  Canada,  350,  352. 

Swans,  in  Canada,  350. 

Swift,  Jonathan,  Gulliver's  Travels, 
xlii. 

Sword-blades,  in  fur-trade,  377. 

Sword-fish,  struggle  with  whale,  30. 


Tabitibi  Indians.      See  Abittibi. 

Tadoussac,  location,  31,  261;  history, 
31  j  seigniories  near,  260;  fur-trade, 
xxxvii ;  English  fleet  off,  242,  244, 
249. 

Tahuglauk  Indians,  habitat,  xxiv,  195; 
characteristics,  194,  196;  manufac- 
tures, 194,  195;  wars,  196. 

Talon,  Ottawa  chief,  153,  317. 

—  Jean,  intendant  of  New  France,  42, 
163;  befriends  Perrot,  53  ;  succes- 
sor, 228;  brings  back  Recollects, 
413. 

Taniias  striatus,  348. 

Tanner,  Herbert  B.,  "Early  Kau- 
kauna,"   174. 

Tazou,  Indian  measure  of  distance, 
192. 

Teals,  in  Canada,  109,  351. 

Tecumseh,  precursor  of,  149. 

Teganissoren,  Onondaga  chief,  sketch, 
222. 

"Tempest,"  carries  Lahontan  to  Can- 
ada, 26. 

Temple,  Sir  Thomas,  grantee  in  Nova 
Scotia,  265. 

Tench,  in  Mississippi  River,  359. 

Temiscaming  (Temiskamink)  Indians, 
characterized,  342. 


TOB 
Teton  (Atinton)  Indians,  Siouan  tribe, 

342>  343- 

Tetu,  Henri,  Palais  episcopal  de  Quebec, 
42. 

Texas,  La  Salle's  expedition  to,  145. 

Thallassartos  maritimus,  348. 

Thegarouhies,  Seneca  village,  131. 

Thevenot,  Nicolas  M.,  Receuil  des  Voy- 
ages Curieux,  412. 

Thomas,  Cyrus,  "Maya  Calendar," 
428. 

Thornbacks,  in  Canada,  358. 

Thread,  in  fur-trade,  378. 

Three  Rivers  (Lake  Superior),  316. 

Three  Rivers  (St.  Lawrence),  48  ;  de- 
scribed, xxxvii,  49-5 1 ;  governors  of, 
51,  98,  131,  266,  383;  fort,  239; 
courts  of  justice,  392;  commerce, 
376. 

Thrushes,  in  Canada,  350. 

Thwaites,  Reuben  G.,  Down  Historic 
Waterways,  178}  Early  Western 
Travels,  93,  304,  417,  433,  457, 
510,  514,  734;  Hennepin's  New 
Discovery,  70,  136,  137,  176,  335, 
413,  460;  How  George  Rogers  Clark 
Won  the  Northwest,  92,  146,  315; 
Original  Journals  of  Lewis  and  Clark 
Expedition,  343,  427,  431,  474,  483; 
'♦Story  of  Chequamegon,"  315; 
"Story  of  Mackinac,"  92,  146; 
Withers'' 's  Chronicles,  506.  See  also 
Jesuit  Relations. 

Timber,  of  Canada,  366,  373,  374. 

Tobacco,  raised  by  Indians,  474 ;  In- 
dians prize  Brazilian,  140,  169,  207, 
373.  377,  4745  _  strongest  known, 
474,  475;  Canadian  resembles  Span- 
ish, 364;  differs  from  Brazilian,  474; 
amount  raised,  373;  imported,  373; 
tariff  on,  373;  cargoes,  287;  price, 
373,  375;  Lahontan  gives  as  present, 
169,     174,     176;     boxes    imported, 

375- 
"Toby,"  vessel.      See  "Joli." 


Index 


795 


TOM 

Tomahawk  (casse-tete),  defined,  402. 

Tonty,  Henri  de,  La  Salle's  lieutenant, 
125,  133;  in  Illinois,  125,  133,  207; 
granted  Fort  St.  Louis,  125,  133, 
207;  Lahontan  accompanies,  xviii, 
*33>  207!  at  Detroit,  133;  in  Louisi- 
ana, 133;  at  Fort  St.  Joseph,  xx, 
139;  respected  by  Indians,  207; 
sketch,  133. 

Toronto,  portage,  318.  See  also  Lake 
Simcoe  and  Georgian  Bay. 

Torontogueronon  Indians,  language  of, 

733- 
Townsend,    Capt.    — ,    English    naval 

officer,  650,  651. 
"  Tract  Scuyt,"  Hollandboat,described, 

652. 
Tracy,    Alexander    Prouville,    marquis 

de,  governor   of  New    France,   52, 

59- 
Treaties,  French  shore  of  Newfoundland 

(1 904),  3  3  3.3345  Ryswick,  2 3 6, 265 ; 
Utrecht,  5,  314,  334. 

Trochilus  colubris,  354. 

Trout,  in  Great  Lakes,  148,  316,  359; 
Newfoundland,  333;  River  Long, 
190;  Lake  Erie,  320;  size,  148, 
362,  363;  inferior  to  whitefish,  148; 
enemies  of  armed-fish,  3625  man- 
ner of  catching,  148,  363  ;  used 
as  bait,  113;  as  food,  467,  482, 
491. 

Troyes,  Chevalier  de,  commandant  at 
Niagara,  131,  162. 

Tsonontouan  Indians.      See  Seneca. 

Turbots,  in  Canada,  358. 

Turcot,  — ,  coureur  de  bois,  141. 

Turenne,  Count  de,  his  son,  11. 

Turkey  wheat,  139,  140,  199,  202. 

Turkeys,  furnished  by  mission  Indians, 
70;  in  Canada,  350;  near  Lake 
Michigan,  210;  in  Illinois,  206;  De- 
troit, 161;  Missouri  River,  200; 
Lake  Erie,  xix,  138,  320,  322. 

Turtle  doves.      See  Pigeons. 


VIN 

United    States    Bureau  of  Ethnology, 

editions  of  Lahontan  in  library,  liii- 

xciii;    Bulletins,    428;    Reports,    47, 

169,  175.  435.  468>  499.  5°9>  5I0> 

JI2- 
—  Geological    Survey,   Contributions  to 

Ethnology,  418. 

Upper  country  (pays  en  haut),  route  to, 
95,  164;  Indians  descend  from,  241; 
French  take  possession  of,  xviii;  pro- 
ject for  fortifyiug,  xxix,  xlv,  271- 
273. 

Ursulines,  in  Canada,  44. 

Ursus  americanus,  347. 


Vaccinium  canadense,  372. 

Valrennes,  Philippe  Clement  Duvault, 
sieur  de,  commandant  at  Fort  Fron- 
tenac,  226,  233;  returns  to  Montreal, 
226;  defeats  English,  262;  sketch, 
226. 

Vaudreuil,  Philippe  de  Rigaud,  marquis 
de,  governor  of  Canada,  119;  rescues 
Lahontan,  xxv,  219;  notified  of  En- 
glish attack  (171 1),  222;  pursues  Iro- 
quois, 270,  271;  sketch,  119. 

Vaugiraud,  birthplace  of  Sulpitian  order, 

55- 
Vaugondy,  Robert  de,  map  of,  xxxviii. 

Vermillion,  in  fur-trade,  378. 

Verazzano,  Giovanni  da,  discovers  Can- 
ada, 303. 

Versailles,  Lahontan  visits,  xxvii,  xxx, 
xxxiii,  xlvi,  252—257,  279,  280; 
court  described,  xxvii,  254-257. 

Vetromile,  Eugene,  Abenakis  and  their 
History,  328. 

Victor  (N.  Y.),  Indian  village  near,  127. 

Viele,  Arnout  Cornelisse,  peace  messen- 
ger, 157- 

Ville  Marie.      See  Montreal. 

Villedonne,  Etienne  de,  captured  by  Iro- 
quois, 224. 

Vincennes,  Jean  Bissot,  sieur  de,  244. 


796 


Index 


VOL 
Voltaire,  Francoise  Marie  Arouet,  dit, 

anticipated  by  Lahontan,  xlvii. 
Vujer,  John  Nider  de,  works  of,  703. 
Vultures,  in  Canada,  350,  352-354. 


Wahpeton      (Ouadebaton)       Indians, 

Siouan  tribe,  342,  343. 
Walnuts,  on  Lake  Erie,  319;  in  Seneca 

country,  131. 
Wampum,  use  of,  431;  belts,  75,  76,  93. 
Wapiti.      See  Elk. 
War,   Frontenac's  (1689-97),   55,   60, 

61,   69,    70,    118,    125,    149,    209, 

230,  240,  275,  328;  Queen  Anne's 

(Spanish    Succession,    1702-13),    5, 

12,  99;  officer  in,  209. 
Washington,  Maj.  George,  visits  French 

on  Allegheny,  209. 
Watches,  imported,  375. 
Water-fowl,  in  Acadia,  331;   in  New- 
foundland, 332,  355,  356;  near  Lake 

Champlain,  xiv,  108,  109. 
Watermelons,  in  Canada,  364,  368,  369. 
Waupaca  County  (Wis.),  Indian  village 

in,  175. 
Wayne,   Gen.    Anthony,   victory   over 

Indians,  461. 
Wea  Indians.      See  Ouiatonon. 
Weasels,  in  Canada,  343,  380. 
Weir,    Robert  Stanley,   Administration 

of  Old  Regime  in  Canada,  34,  45. 
Wells,  H.  P.,  "The  Beaver,"  479,  483. 
West  Indies,  French  possessions  in,  26, 

288,   289,   334;  French  officers  in, 

59,    236;   death  of  Iberville,    236; 

Spanish  treasure,  244;  English  fleet, 

288,  289;  commerce,  374. 
Whales,  struggle   with  sword-fish,   305 

off  Newfoundland,  333;  in  Canada, 

358.      See  also  Balenots. 
Wheler,  Sir  Francis,  besieges  Placentia, 

288,  289;  sketch,  289. 
Whistlers  (sifflers),  described,  no,  111, 

344- 


WIS 

White,  Andrew  D.,  Warfare  of  Science 
<with  Theology,  704. 

Whitefish,  at  Mackinac,  147;  as  food, 
147,  148,  169,  363;  netted,  147;  in 
Great  Lakes,  316,  359. 

White-wood,  of  Canada,  365,  371,  372. 

Wildcats,  called  "children  of  Devil," 
344;  Lahontan  hunts,  115;  skins, 
376,  380. 

Wild  rice,  Indian  food,  174,  175. 

William  III  (Prince  of  Orange),  king  of 
England,  3,  217;  orders  attack  on 
Placentia,  278;  invades  England, 
12. 

Williams,  Commodore  — ,  attacks  Pla- 
centia, 275-279. 

—  Roger,  writings  of,  734. 

Wines,  exported  to  Canada,  373;  made 
in  Canada,  368;  value,  375;  of  Ara- 
gon,  721;  Denmark,  671;  Germany, 
663;   Holland,  663. 

Winnebago  Indians,  Siouan  tribe,  398; 
significance  of  name,  146;  habitat, 
398;  bay  and  river  named  for,  167, 
168. 

—  Rapids  (Wis.),  174. 

Winship,  George  Parker,  aid  acknowl- 
edged, liii. 

Winsor,  Justin,  Narrative  and  Critical 
History  of  America,  lii. 

Winthrop,  Gen.  John,  commands  Cana- 
dian expedition,  240. 

Wisconsin,  early  exploration  of,  209; 
fertility,  168;  route  to  Mississippi, 
168,  177,  178;  Indians,  77,  168,  174, 
J75>  34T>  39^5  Indian  wars,  xlvi; 
Lahontan  visits,  167-178;  mission 
in,  168;  territory  of,  178;  Historical 
Society,  staff  of,  xlviii;  editions  of 
Lahontan  in  library  of,  liii-xciii;  erects 
monument,  168;  Historical  Collec- 
tions, 77,  82,  99,  139,  140,  146, 
174,  I75>  *77>  312,  315,  317,  343, 
460,  461,  506;  Proceedings,  168, 174, 
312. 


Index 


797 


WIT 

Witchcraft,  Lahontan  on,  696-7 1  o ;  pen- 
alty for,  562-564. 

Withers,  Alexander,  Chronicles  of  Bor- 
der Warfare,  506. 

Wolf  Indians.      See  Loup. 

Wolverine.      See  Carcajou. 

Wolves,  Canadian,  343;  on  River  Long, 
183;  do  not  attack  beavers,  480; 
traps,  483,  484;  price  of  skins,  380. 

Wood-hens,  351;  as  food,  105,  169; 
hunted,  115,  116. 

Woolen  cloth,  Canadian  import,  377. 


ZIZ 

Wrightstown  (Wis.),  rapids  near,    174. 
Wyandot  Indians.      See  Huron. 

Yamaska  County  (Quebec),  Indian  mis- 
sion in,  49. 

Yankton  Indians,  Siouan  tribe,  343. 

Yellowstone  National  Park,  beaver- 
preserve  in,  481. 

Zeno,  cited  by  Lahontan,  419. 
Zizania  aquatica,  175. 


VOLUMES    IN 
McCLURG'S     LIBRARY 
REPRINTS    OF    AMERICANA 

UNIFORM  IN   STYLE   AND    BINDING 


McC/urg's  Library  Reprints  of  Afnericana 

HISTORY  OF 

THE  EXPEDITION  OF  CAPTAINS 

LEWIS  AND  CLARK 

1804-5-6 

Reprinted  from  the  Edition  of  1814.  With  an  Intro- 
duction by  James  K.  Hosmer,  LL.D.,  an  analytical 
Index,  photogravure  portraits,  and  maps. 

This  edition  of  the  famous  Journal  has  been  prepared  to  meet  the 
urgent  need  for  a  standard,  popular  edition,  something  that  has  not  been 
available  for  years. 

"The  republication  of  the  complete  narrative  is  both  timely  and  inval- 
uable. .  .  .  Dr.  Hosmer  is  well  known  as  an  authority  on  Western 
history  ;  hence  to  see  his  name  on  the  title-page  is  to  know  that  the  work 
has  been  well  done." — Portland  Oregonian. 

"The  celebrated  story  of  the  expedition  of  Lewis  and  Clark  has  now 
been  put  in  an  easily  accessible  form."  —  N.  T.  Times  Saturday  Review. 

"Of  the  several  new  editions  of  this  valuable  narrative,  this  is  by  far 
the  best  and  most  complete." — Minneapolis  Journal. 

"The  most  complete  and  satisfactory  edition  of  this  classic  that  has 
come  to  our  notice." — San  Francisco  Chronicle. 

"  We  have  nothing  but  praise  for  this  clear  and  handsome  reprint." — 
The  Nation. 

r 

In  tvjo  octavo  volumes,  boxed,  $5.00  net 

Large-paper  edition  (limited)  on  Brovori s  hand-made  paper,  illustrations 

on  Japan  paper,  $15.00  net 

A.  C.  McCLURG  &  CO.,  Publishers,  Chicago 


McC/urg's  Library  Reprints  of  Americana 

FATHER    HENNEPIN'S 
"A      NEW      DISCOVERY" 

(NOUFELLE    DECOVVERTE) 

Exact  Reprint  of  the  Second  Issue  of  1698.  With 
Introduction,  Notes,  and  analytical  Index  by 
Reuben  Gold  Thwaites,  LL.D.,  a  new  Bibliog- 
raphy by  Victor  Hugo  Paltsits,  fac-similes  of 
the  seven  full-page  illustrations,  and  two  large  fold- 
ing maps. 

This  particular  book  by  Father  Hennepin  is  generally  considered  the 
most  representative  product  of  his  pen,  and  as  a  human  document  it 
has  few  rivals  in  our  literature.  Moreover,  it  is  the  only  one  of  the 
Hennepin  books  now  upon  the  market. 

"  None  of  the  many  recent  reprints  of  Americana  is  of  greater  impor- 
tance to  collectors  and  students  than  the  re-issue  of  Father  Louis  Hennepin's 
«  A  New  Discovery  of  a  Vast  Country  in  America.'.  .  .  Mechanically, 
the  book  is  superbly  produced,  and  it  seems  to  us  to  be  the  best  made  book, 
in  every  particular,  that  has  been  offered  the  trade  during  the  current  sea- 
son."—  Chicago  Evening  Post. 

"  It  should  be  a  subject  of  rejoicing  among  those  of  our  citizens  who 
cherish  the  past,  that  Dr.  Thwaites  and  his  publishers  have  given  us  these 
two  beautiful  and  scholarly  volumes  —  a  presentment  which  leaves  nothing 
more  to  be  desired."  — Minneapolis  Tunes. 


In  tivo  octavo  volumes,  boxed,  $6.00  net 

Large-paper  edition  (limited)  on  Broaun 's  hand-made  paper,  illustrations 

on  Japan  paper,  $18. 00  net 

A.  C.  McCLURG  &  CO.,  Publishers,  Chicago 


McC/urg's  Library  Reprints  of  Americana 

GASS'S  JOURNAL 

OF  THE  LEWIS  AND  CLARK 

EXPEDITION 

Reprinted  from  the  Edition  of  1811.  With  an  In- 
troduction and  analytical  Index  by  James  K.  Hos- 
mer,  LL.D.,  fac-similes  of  the  original  title-page 
and  the  five  original  illustrations,  and  a  reproduc- 
tion of  a  rare  portrait  of  Sergeant  Patrick  Gass. 

Gass's  narrative  was  for  seven  years  the  only  source  from  which  any 
authentic  knowledge  of  the  Lewis  and  Clark  expedition  could  be  ob- 
tained. When  at  last  the  work  based  on  the  diaries  of  the  Captains 
was  given  to  the  world,  the  earlier  book,  so  far  from  being  set  aside, 
was  found  to  be  most  important  as  confirming  and  supplementing 
what  had  been  set  down  by  the  leaders.  The  work  originally  ap- 
peared in  1807,  and  ran  through  three  editions,  the  third  dated  1  8 1 1  ; 
but  no  reprint  has  been  made  since  the  somewhat  crude  edition 
published  at  Dayton,  Ohio,  in  1847,  which  has,  of  course,  long  been 
out  of  print. 

"It  is  needless  to  say  that  the  editing  by  Dr.  Hosmer,  who  has 
given  so  many  years  to  a  study  of  the  early  history  of  the  Northwest, 
is  faultless  ;  and  the  volume  will  be  a  welcome  addition  to  many  a 
library  collecting  data  now  upon  all  that  relates  to  the  Louisiana  Pur- 
chase."—  The  Interior. 

"  In  some  respects,  the  general  reader  will  prefer  the  descriptions 
of  Gass  to  the  official  records."  —  The  Dial. 

In  one  octavo  volume,  boxed,  $3.50  net 

Large-paper  edition  {limited)  on  Brown' s  hand-made  paper,  illustrations 

on  Japan  paper,  #9.00  net 

A.  C.  McCLURG  &  CO.,  Publishers,  Chicago 


McC/urg's  Library  Reprints  of  Americana 

LAHONTAN'S 

NEW    VOYAGES    TO    NORTH 

AMERICA 


Reprinted  from  the  English  Edition  of  1703.  With 
Introduction,  Notes,  and  analytical  Index  by  Reuben 
Gold  Thwaites,  LL.D.,  a  Bibliography  by  Victor 
Hugo  Paltsits,  fac-similes  of  original  title-pages, 
and  twenty-four  maps  and  illustrations. 

The  selection  of  the  famous  writings  of  Baron  Lahontan  for  repub- 
lication is  a  natural  one  after  the  success  of  the  reprint  of  Kennepin 
issued  in  1903.  It  is  a  logical  step  in  the  preparation  of  the  Americana 
series  planned  by  Messrs.  McClurg  &  Co.,  and  the  appearance  of 
Lahontan's  Voyages  in  a  standard  library  edition  will  be  as  welcome 
as  that  of  the  preceding  volumes.  Like  the  Hennepin,  it  is  a  word- 
for-word  reprint. 


r 


In  tivo  <?fo  'volumes,  boxed,  $7.^0  net 

Large-paper  edition  {limited)  on  Brown"  s  hand-made  paper,  illustrations 

on  Japan  paper,  $18.00  net 


UNIVERSITY  OF  ILLINOIS-UHBANA 


3  0112  002226683 

