The  Mbyinscript  Found 


L 


" 


Manuscript  Story, 


Reverend  Solomon  Spalding; 


Manuscript  Found. 


;  i 


From  a  verbatim  copy  of  the  original  now  in  the  Library  ofOberlin  College. 

Ohio;    including    correspondence  touching  the  Manuscript,   its 

preservation  and  transmission  until  it  came  into  Iht 

hands  of  the  publishers. 


LAMONI.  fOWA: 

Printed  and  published  by  the  Reorganized  Church  of  Jesus  Christ 
of  Latter  Day  Saints. 


fix 


EMMANUEL 


LIBRARY  RULES. 

1.  Borrowers  are  only  entitled  to 
one  book  at  a  time. 

2.  Books  should  not  be  retained  on 
loan  for  a  period  longer  than 
two  weeks. 

3.  Any  borrower  retaining  a  book 
for  a  longer  period  than  four 
teen  days  shall  pay  a  fine  of 
3d.  for  each  week  over  that 
period. 

4.  Any  borrower  losing  a  book  must 
replace  same  or  pay  an  amount 
equal  to  the  new  value  of  the 
lost  book. 

5.  Books  will  not  be  loaned  out 
unless  the  Borrower  supplies 
the  Librarian  with  his  or  her 
Library  Card. 

6.  The  fees  are  Id.  per  book  for 
adults  and  id.  for  children. 


I  A  oo 


55 


TllL  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 


THE    "MANUSCRIPT     STORY." 

A  Verbatim   Copy  from   tHe   Original. 


HEREWITH  we  present  to  the  reader  the  notorious 
"Manuscript  Story"  ["Manuscript  Found"],  of  the 
Reverend  Solomon  Spalding.  What  gives  this  docu 
ment  prominence  is  the  fact  that  for  the  past  fifty 
years  it  has  been  made  to  do  ducy  by  the  opposers  of 
the  Book  of  Mormon  as  the  source,  the  root,  and  the 
inspiration,  by  and  from  which  Joseph  Smith  and 
Sydney  Rigdon  wrote  the  Book  of  Mormon.  It  has 
been  popularly  and  persistently  claimed  that  the 
plan,  subject  matter,  including  prominent  names  and 
localites,  history  of  the  origin  of  the  aboriginal  races 
of  America,  with  their  arts  and  sciences,  civilizations 
and  customs,  were  identical  in  this  "Manuscript 
Found"  and  in  the  Book  of  Mormon.  Thousands 
have  believed  this  false  and  foolish  statement,  with 
out  giving  its  truth  or  falsity  an  hour's  fair  and 
unprejudiced  investigation,  and  then  fought  the  book 
and  the  church  with  a  readinesc  and  a  zeal  almost 
without  a  parallel.  And  now  that  this  veritable 
"Manuscript  Found,"  with  an  unbroken  chain  of 
evidence  proving  its  identity  and  running  back  to 
E.  D.  Howe,  D.  P.  Hurlbut,  Spalding's  "old  trunk," 
and  so  back  to  Pittsburg,  Conneaut,  and  to  the  very 
pen  of  Solomon  Spalding,  has  by  the  providence  of 
God  been  furnished  us,  and  that,  too,  by  those  not  of 
the  church,  we  take  pleasure  in  exhibiting  in  the 


4  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

sunlight  of  solid  facts,  this  hob -goblin  of  the  pulpit, 
this  "nigger-in-the-woodpile"  of  the  press  and  the 
forum,  that  with  which  they  have  fooled  and  fright 
ened  the  masses  and  blinded  those  inquiring  into  the 
origin  and  character  of  the  Book  of  Mormon. 

This  seeming  huge  hindrance  and  insurmountable 
obstacle  which  is  always  thrown  in  the  way  of  the 
investigator  with  all  the  skill  and  power  that  craft 
and  cunning  and  malice  and  fear  and  blind  zeal  can 
invent  and  command,  vanishes  from  the  presence  of 
this  original  witness  in  the  case;  for  when  it  speaks 
it  reveals  the  flimsiness  and  falsity  of  the  claim  that 
it  was  in  any  way  or  in  any  sense  the  origin  of  the 
Book  of  Mormon,  or  that  there  is  the  least  likeness 
between  the  two.  This  newly  found  "missing  link" 
completes  the  chain  of  evidence  which  proves  that 
the  "Manuscript  Found"  never  was  and  never  could 
be  made  the  occasion,  cause,  or  germ  of  the  Book  of 
Mormon. 

Mr.  Spalding  has  been  exalted  by  the  opposers  of 
the  Latter  Day  Saints  to  the  very  pinnacle  of  fame, 
as  a  very  learned,  very  moral,  and  very  pious  man. 
It  is  fortunate  that  his  true  measure  and  worth  in 
respect  to  his  learning,  his  morals,  and  his  piety,  is 
now  furnished  us  in  this  "Manuscript  Story."  God 
judges  men  by  their  works,  and  it  is  wise  for  men  to 
judge  of  each  other  after  this  manner.  And  when 
we  estimate  Mr.  Spalding  by  the  character  of  his 
work  as  exhibited  in  this  document,  we  must  grade 
him  down  to  a  very  low  level,  whether  in  respect  to 
scholarship,  mental  power,  moral  purity,  or  pious 
attainments  and  tendencies. 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  5 

The  following  correspondence  explains  the  man 
ner  in  which  the  manuscript  was  preserved  and 
placed  in  the  hands  of  the  present  publishers. 


The  following  from  the  Bibliotheca  Sacra  was 
republished  in  many  leading  journals  east  and  west, 
among  them  the  Herald  of  Grinnell,  Iowa;  the 
Western  Watchman,  Eureka,  California;  the  New 
York  Observer,  and  Frank  Leslie's  Sunday  Maga 
zine. 

"The  theory  of  the  origin  of  the  Book  of  Mormon  in  the  tra 
ditional  manuscript  of  Solomon  Spaulding,  will  probably  have 
to  be  relinquished.  That  manuscript  is  doubtless  now  in  the 
possession  of  Mr.  L.  L.  Rice,  of  Honolulu.  Hawaiian  Islands, 
formerly  an  anti-slavery  editor  in  Ohio,  and  for  many  years 
State  Printer,  at  Columbus.  During  a  r  cent  visit  to  Honolulu, 
I  iOggested  to  Mr.  Rice  that  he  might  have  valuable  anti-slav 
ery  documents  in  his  possession,  which  he  would  be  willing  to 
contribute  to  the  rich  collection  already  in  the  Oberlin  College 
Library.  In  pursuance  of  this  suggestion,  Mr.  Rice  began  look 
ing  over  his  old  pamphlets  and  papers,  and  at  length  came  upon 
an  old,  worn,  and  faded  manuscript  of  about  one  hundred  and 
seventy-five  pages,  small  quarto,  purporting  to  be  a  history  of 
the  migrations  and  conflicts  of  the  ancient  Indian  Tribes,  which 
occupied  the  territory  now  belonging  to  the  States  of  New  York, 
Ohio,  and  Kentucky.  On  the  last  page  of  this  manuscript  is  a 
certificate  and  signature,  giving  the  names  of  several  persons 
known  to  the  signer,  who  have  assured  him  that  to  their  per 
sonal  knowledge  the  manuscript  was  the  writing  of  Solomon 
Spaulding.  Mr.  Rice  has  no  recollection  how  or  when  this 
manuscript  came  into  his  possession.  It  was  enveloped  in  a 
coarse  piece  of  wrapping  paper,  and  endorsed  in  Mr.  Rice's 
handwriting,  'A  Manuscript  Story.* 

"There  seems  no  reason  to  doubt  that  this  is  the  long-lost 
story.  Mr.  Rice,  myself,  and  others,  compared  it  with  the  Book 
of  Mormon,  and  could  detect  no  resemblance  between  the  two, 


6  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

in  general  or  in  detail.  There  seems"  to  be  no  name  or  incident 
common  to  the  two.  The  solemn  style  of  the  Book  of  Mormon, 
in  imitation  of  the  English  Scriptures,  does  not  appear  in  the 
manuscript.  The  only  resemblance  is  in  the  fact  that  both  pro 
fess  to  set  forth  the  history  of  lost  tribes.  Some  other  explana 
tion  of  the  origin  of  the  Book  of  Mormon  must  be  found,  if  any 
explanation  is  required."  Signed,  James  H.  Fairchild. 

The  letter  below  was  written  in  answer  to  our  sug 
gestion  that  the  Manuscript  b©  sent  for  safe  keeping 
to  some  Historical  Society  in  Chicago,  Illinois. 

HONOLULU,  Sandwich  Islands,  March  28, 1885. 
MR.  JOSEPH  SMITH  : 

The  Spaulding  Manuscript  in  my  possession  came  into  my 
hands  in  this  wise.  In  1839-40  my  partner  and  myself  bought  of 
E.  D.  Howe  the  Painesville  Telegraph,  published  at  Painesville, 
Ohio.  The  transfer  of  the  printing  department,  types,  press, 
&c.,  was  accompanied  with  a  large  collection,  of  books,  manu 
scripts,  &c.,  this  manuscript  of  Spaulding  among  the  rest.  So, 
you  see,  it  has  been  in  my  possession  over  forty  years.  But  I 
never  examined  it,  or  knew  the  character  of  it,  until  some  six  or 
eight  months  since.  The  wrapper  was  marked,  "Manuscript 
Story — Conneaut  Creek."  The  wonder  is,  that  in  some  of  my 
movements,  I  did  not  destroy  or  burn  it  with  a  large  amount  of 
rubbish  that  had  accumulated  from  time  to  time. 

It  happened  that  President  Fairchild  was  here  on  a  visit,  at 
the  time  I  discovered  the  contents  of  it,  and  it  was  examined  by 
him  and  others  with  much  curiosity.  Since  President  Fairchild 
published  the  fact  of  its  existence  in  my  possession,  I  have  had 
applications  for  it  from  half  a  dozen  sources,  each  applicant 
seeming  to  think  that  he  or  she  was  entitled  to  it.  Mr.  Howe 
says  when  he  was  getting  up  a  book  to  expose  Mormonism  as  a 
fraud  at  an  early  day,  when  the  Mormons  had  their  headquar 
ters  at  Kirtland,  he  obtained  it  from  some  source,  and  it  was 
inadvertently  transferred  with  the  other  effects  of  his  printing 
office.  A.  B.  Deming,  of  Painesville,  who  is  also  getting  up 
some  kind  of  a  book  I  believe  on  Mormonism,  wants  me  to  send 
it  to  him.  Mrs.  Dickinson,  of  Boston,  claiming  to  be  a  relative 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  7 

of  Spaulding,  and  who  is  getting  up  a  book  to  show  that  he  was 
the  real  author  of  the  Book  of  Mormon,  wants  it.  She  thinks, 
at  least,  it  should  be  sent  to  Spaulding's  daughter,  a  Mrs.  Some 
body—but  she  does  not  inform  me  where  she  lives.  Doming 
says  that  Howe  borrowed  it  when  he  was  getting  up  his  book, 
and  did  not  return  it,  as  he  should  have  done,  etc. 

This  Manuscript  does  not  purport  to  be  "a  story  of  the  Indians 
formerly  occupying  this  continent;"  but  is  a  history  of  the  wars 
between  the  Indians  of  Ohio  and  Kentucky,  and  their  progress 
in  civilization,  etc.  It  is  certain  that  this  Manuscript  is  not  the 
origin  of  the  Mormon  Bible,  whatever  some  other  manuscript 
may  have  been.  The  only  similarity  between  them,  is,  in  the 
manner  in  which  each  purports  to  have  been  found — one  in  a 
cave  on  Conneaut  Creek— the  other  in  a  hill  in  Ontario  County, 
New  York.  There  is  no  identity  of  names,  of  persons,  or  places; 
and  there  is  no  similarity  of  style  between  them.  As  I  told  Mr. 
Deming,  I  should  as  soon  think  the  Book  of  Revelations  was 
written  by  the  author  of  Don  Quixote,  as  that  the  writer  of  this 
Manuscript  was  the  author  of  the  Book  of  Mormon.  Deming 
says  Spaulding  made  three  copies  of  "Manuscript  Found,"  one 
of  which  Sidney  Rigdon  stole  from  a  printing-office  in  Pitts- 
burg.  You  can  probably  tell  better  than  I  can,  what  ground 
there  is  for  such  an  allegation. 

As  to  this  Manuscript,  I  can  not  see  that  it  can  be  of  any  use 
to  any  body,  except  the  Mormons,  to  show  that  IT  is  not  the 
original  of  the  Mormon  Bible.  But  that  would  not  settle  the 
•claim  that  some  other  manuscript  of  Spaulding  was  the  original 
of  it.  I  propose  to  hold  it  in  my  own  hands  for  a  while,  to  see  if 
it  can  not  be  put  to  some  good  use.  Deming  aad  Howe  inform 
me  that  its  existence  is  exciting  great  interest  in  that  region.  I 
am  under  a  tacit,  but  not  a  positive  pledge  to  President  Fair- 
child,  to  deposit  it  eventually  in  the  Library  of  Oberlin  College. 
I  shall  be  free  from  that  pledge,  when  I  see  an  opportunity  to 
put  it  to  a  better  use.  Yours,  etc., 

L.  L.  RICE. 

P.  S.— Upon  reflection,  since  writing  the  foregoing,  I  am  of 
the  opinion  that  no  one  who  reads  this  Manuscript  will  give 
credit  to  the  story  that  Solomon  Spaulding  was  in  any  wise  the 


8  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

author  of  the  Book  of  Mormon.  It  is  unlikely  that  any  one  who 
wrote  so  elaborate  a  work  as  the  Mormon  Bible,  would  spend  his 
time  in  getting  up  so  shallow  a  story  as  this,  which  at  best  is  but 
a  feeble  imitation  of  the  other.  Finally  I  am  more  than  half 
convinced  that  this  is  his  only  writing  of  the  sort,  and  that  any 
pretence  that  Spaulding  was  in  any  sense  the  author  of  the 
other,  is  a  sheer  fabrication.  It  was  easy  for  anybody  who 
may  have  seen  this,  or  heard  anything  of  its  contents,  to  get  up 
the  story  that  they  were  identical.  L.  L.  R. 


HONOLULU,  Sandwich  Islands, 

May  14,  1885. 
MR.  JOSEPH  SMITH; 

Dear  Sir:  I  am  greatly  obliged  to  you  for  the  information  con 
cerning  Mormonism,  in  your  letters  of  April  30  and  May  2.  As 
I  am  in  no  sense  a  Mormonite,  of  course  it  is  a  matter  of  curi 
osity,  mainly,  that  I  am  interested  in  the  history  of  Mormonism. 

Two  things  are  true  concerning  this  manuscript  in  my  posses 
sion:  First,  it  is  a  genuine  writing  of  Solomon  Spaulding;  and 
second,  it  is  not  the  original  of  the  Book  of  Mormon. 

My  opinion  is,  from  all  I  have  seen  and  learned,  that  this  is 
the  only  writing  of  Spaulding,  and  there  is  no  foundation  for 
the  statement  of  Deming  and  others,  that  Spaulding  made 
another  story,  more  elaborate,  of  which  several  copies  were 
written,  one  of  which  Rigdon  stole  from  a  printing-office  in 
Pittsburg,  etc.  Of  course  I  can  not  be  as  certain  of  this,  as  of 
the  other  two  points.  One  theory  is,  that  Rigdon,  or  some  one 
else,  saw  this  manuscript,  or  heard  it  read,  and  from  the  hints 
it  conveyed,  got  up  the  other  and  more  elaborate  writing  on 
which  the  Book  of  Mormon  was  founded.  Take  that  for  what 
it  is  worth.  It  don't  seem  to  me  very  likely. 

You  may  be  at  rest  as  to  my  putting  the  manuscript  into  the 
possession  of  any  one  who  will  mutilate  it,  or  use  it  for  a  bad 
purpose.  I  shall  have  it  deposited  in  the  Library  of  Oberlin 
College,  in  Ohio,  to  be  at  the  disposal  for  reading  of  any  one 
who  may  wish  to  peruse  it;  but  not  to  be  removed  from  that 
depository.  My  friend,  President  Fairchild,  may  be  relied  on  as 
security  for  the  safe-keeping  of  it.  It  will  be  sent  there  in  July, 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY"  9 

by  a  friend  who  is  going  there  to  "take  to  himself  a  wife." 
Meantime,  I  have  made  a  literal  copy  of  the  entire  document- 
errors  of  orthography,  grammar,  erasures,  and  all— which  I  shall 
keep  in  my  possession,  so  that  any  attempt  to  mutilate  it  will  be 
of  easy  detection  and  exposure.  Oberlin  is  a  central  place,  in 
the  vicinity  of  Conneaut,  where  the  manuscript  was  written. 

I  have  had  an  idea,  sometimes,  that  it  is  due  to  the  Mormons 
to  have  a  copy  of  it,  if  they  took  interest  in  it  enough  to  publish 
it.  As  it  is  only  of  interest  as  showing  that  it  is  not  the  original 
of  the  Book  of  Mormon,  no  one  else  is  likely  to  wish  it  for  pub 
lication. 

Miss  Dickinson,  whom  you  call  a  granddaughter  of  Solomon 
Spaulding,  represents  herself  to  me  as  his  grandniece:  "My 
great  uncle,  Rev.  Solomon  Spaulding,"  she  writes. 

Rev.  Dr.  Hyde,  President  of  the  Institution,  in  this  place,  for 
training  Native  Missionaries  for  Micranesia,  (a  very  prominent 
and  successful  institution),  has  written  an  elaborate  account  of 
this  manuscript,  and  of  Mormonism,  and  sent  it  for  publication 
in  the  Congregalionalist,  of  Boston.  I  presume  it  will  be  pub 
lished,  and  you  will  be  interested  in  reading  it. 

Very  respectfully,  yours, 

L.  L.  RICE. 

In  a  postscript  Mr.  Rice  says  he  found  the  follow 
ing  endorsement  on  the  Manuscript: 

"The  writings  of  Solomon  Spaulding  proved  by  Aron  Wright, 
Oliver  Smith,  John  N.  Miller  and  others.  The  testimonies  of 
the  above  gentlemen  are  now  in  my  possession. 

(Signed)  D.  P.  HURLBUT." 

COPY  OP  MR.  RICE'S   LETTER. 

HONOLULU,  H.  I.,  June  12,  1885. 
PRESIDENT  J.  H.  FAIRCHILD: 

Herewith  I  send  to  you  the  Solomon  Spalding  Manuscript,  to 
be  deposited  in  the  Library  of  Oberlin  College,  for  reference  by 
any  one  who  may  be  desirous  of  seeing  or  examining  it.  As  a 
great  deal  of  inquiry  has  been  made  about  it  since  it  became 


10  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

known  that  it  was  in  my  possession,  I  deem  it  proper  that  it  be 
deposited  for  safe  keeping,  where  any  one  interested  in  it, 
whether  Mormon  or  Anti-Mormon,  may  examine  it.  It  has 
been  in  my  possession  forty-six  years — from  1839  to  1885 — and 
for  forty-four  years  of  that  time  no  one  examined  it,  and  I  was 
not  aware  of  the  character  of  its  contents.  I  send  it  to  you 
enclosed  in  the  same  paper  wrapper,  and  tied  with  the  same 
string  that  must  have  enclosed  it  for  near  half  a  century— cer 
tainly  during  the  forty-six  years  since  it  came  into  my  posses 
sion.  I  have  made  and  retain  in  my  possession  a  correct  literal 
copy  of  it,  errors  of  orthography,  of  grammar,  erasures  and  all. 
I  may  allow  the  Mormons  of  Utah  to  print  it  from  this  copy, 
which  they  are  anxious  to  do;  and  a  delegation  is  now  in  the 
Islands,  awaiting  my  decision  on  this  point.  They  claim  that 
they  are  entitled  to  whatever  benefit  they  may  derive  from  its 
publication;  and  it  seems  to  me  there  is  some  justice  in  that 
claim.  Whether  it  will  relieve  them  in  any  measure,  from  the 
imputation  that  Solomon  Spalding  was  the  author  of  the  Book 
of  Mormon,  I  do  not  attempt  to  decide.  It  devolves  upon  their 
opponents  to  show  that  there  are  or  were  other  writings  of 
Spalding — since  it  is  evident  that  this  writing  is  not  the  original 
of  the  Mormon  Bible. 

Truly,  yours,  etc., 

L.  L.  RICE. 

F.  S.— The  words  "Solomon  Spaulding's  Writings"  in  ink 
on  the  wrapper  were  written  by  me,  after  I  became  aware  of 
the  contents.  The  words  "Manuscript  Story — Conneaut 
Creek,"  in  faint  penciling,  were  as  now  when  it  came  into  my 
possession. 


OBERLIN  COLLEGE,  Oberlin,  Ohio. 

July  23,  1885. 

I  have  this  day  delivered  to  Mr.  E.  L.  Kelley  a  copy  of  the 
Manuscript  of  Solomon  Spaulding,  sent  from  Honolulu  by  Mr. 
L.  L.  Rice,  to  the  Library  of  Oberlin  College,  for  safe-keeping, 
and  now  in  my  care.  The  copy  was  prepared  at  Mr.  Kelley's 
request,  under  my  supervision,  and  is,  as  I  believe,  an  exact 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  11 

;ranscript  of  the  original  manuscript,  including  erasures,  mis 
spellings,  etc.  JAS.  H.  FAIRCHILD, 

Prest.  of  Oberlin  College. 

KIRTLAND,  Ohio,  July  24,  1885. 
PRES.  W.  W.  BLAIR,  Lamoni,  Iowa: 

Herewith  I  transmit  to  you  the  copy  of  the  Spaulding  Manu 
script  prepared  by  President  Fairchild  as  attested  by  him, 
together  with  his  certificate,  and  photograph  sheets. 

E.  L.  KELLEY. 


Words  and  sentences  underlined  were  stricken  out  In  the  Manuscript. 
Places  marked  thus the  copy  was  Illegible. 


INTRODUCTION. 

NEAR  the  west  Bank  of  the  Coneaught  River  there 
are  the  remains  of  an  ancient  fort.  As  I  was  walk 
ing  and  forming  various  conjectures  respecting  the 
character  situation  &  numbers  of  those  people  who 
far  exceeded  the  present  Indians  in  works  of  art  and 
inginuety,  I  hapned  to  tread  on  a  flat  stone.  This 
was  at  a  small  distance  from  the  fort,  <fe  it  lay  on  the 
top  of  a  great  small  mound  of  Earth  exactly  horizon 
tal.  The  face  of  it  had  a  singular  appearance.  I 
discovered  a  number  of  characters,  which  appeared 
to  me  to  be  letters,  but  so  much  effaced  by  the  rav 
ages  of  time,  that  I  could  not  read  the  inscription. 
With  the  assistance  of  a  leaver  I  raised  the  stone. 

But  you  may  easily  conjecture  my  astonishment 
when  I  discovered  that  its  ends  and  sides  rested  on 
stones  &  that  it  was  designed  as  a  cover  to  an  arti- 


12  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

ficial  Cave.     I  found  by  examining  that  its  sides  were 

lined  with  stones  built  in  a  connical  form  with 

down,  &  that  it  was  about  eight  feet  deep.  Deter 
mined  to  investigate  the  design  of  this  extraordinary 
work  of  antiquity,  I  prepared  myself  with  the  neces 
sary  requisites  for  that  purpose  and  descended  to  the 
Bottom  of  the  Cave.  Observing  one  side  to  be  per 
pendicular  nearly  three  feet  from  the  bottom,  I  began 
to  inspect  that  part  with  accuracy.  Here  I  noticed  a 
big  flat  stone  fixed  in  the  form  of  a  doar.  I  immedi 
ately  tore  it  down  and  Lo,  a  cavity  within  the  wall 
presented  itself  it  being  about  three  feet  in  diamiter 
from  side  to  side  and  about  two  feet  high.  Within 
this  cavity  I  found  an  earthern  Box  with  a  cover  which 
shut  it  perfectly  tite.  The  Box  was  two  feet  in  length 
one  &  half  in  breadth  &  one  &  three  inches  in  diame 
ter.  My  mind  filled  with  awful  sensations  which 
crowded  fast  upon  me  would  hardly  permit  my  hands 
to  remove  this  venerable  deposit,  but  curiosity  soon 
gained  the  assendency  &  the  box  was  taken  &  raised 
to  open  it.  When  I  had  removed  the  Cover  I  found 
that  it  contained  twenty-eight  rolls  of  parchment-&- 
that  when  -  -  -  appeared  to  be  manuscrips  written  in 
eligant  hand  with  Roman  Letters  &  in  the  Latin  Lan 
guage. 

They  were  written  on  a  variety  of  Subjects.  But 
the  Roll  which  principally  attracted  my  attention 
contained  a  history  of  the  author's  life  &  that  part 
of  America  which  extends  along  the  great  Lakes  & 
the  waters  of  the  Mississippy. 

Extracts  of  the  most  interesting  and  important  mat- 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY.'1  18 

ters  contined  in  this  Roll  I  take  the  liberty  to  pub 
lish. 

Gentle  Reader,  tread  lightly  on  the  ashes  of  the 
venerable  dead.  Thou  must  know  that  this  Country 
was  once  inhabited  by  great  and  powerful  nations 
considerably  civilized  &  skilled  in  the  arts  of  war,  <t 
that  on  ground  where  thou  now  treadeat  many  a 
bloody  Battle  hath  been  fought,  &  heroes  by  thou 
sands  have  been  made  to  bite  the  dust. 

In  the  history  given  of  these  nations  by  my  author 
you  will  find  nothing1  but  what  will  mi-respond  with 
the  natural  sentiments  we  should  form  on  viewing  the 
innumerable  remains  of  antiquity  which  are  scattered 
OYer  an  extensive  Country.  This  is  an  evidence  of 
the  author's  impartiality  and  veracity.  But  if  any 
should  pretend  that  the  whole  story  is  fictitious  or 
fabulous 

To  publish  a  translation  of  every  particular  cir 
cumstance  mentioned  by  our  author  would  produce  a 
volume  too  expensive  for  the  general  class  of  readers, 
But  should  this  attempt  to  throw  off  the  veil  which 
has  seculded  our  view  from  the  transactions  o  nations 
who  for  ages  have  been  extinct,  meet  the  approbation 
of  the  public,  I  shall  then  be  happy  to  gratify  the 
more  inquisitive  and  learned  part  of  my  readers  by 
a  more  minute  publication.  Apprehensive  that  skep 
tical  illiberal  or  superstitous  minds  may  censure  this 
performance  with  great  accrimony  I  have  only  to 
remark  that  they  will  be  deprived  of.  a  great  fund  of 
entertainment  -  -  -  of  a  contrary  disposition  will 


14  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

obtain.  My  compassion  will  be  excited  more  than 
my  resentment  and  there  the  contest  will  end. 

Now,  Gentle  Reader,  the  Translator  who  wishes 
well  to  thy  present  and  thy  future  existence  entreats 
thee  to  peruse  this  volume  with  a  clear  head  a  pure 
heart  and  a  candid  mind.  If  thou  shalt  then  find 
that  thy  head  and  thy  heart  are  both  improved  it  will 
afford  him  more  satisfaction  than  the  approbation  of 
ten  thousand  who  have  received  no  benefit. 

And  now  permit  me  to  admonish  thee  that  if  thou 
shouldst  reside  in  or  travil  thro*  any  part  of  the 


CHAPT.  I. 

AN  EPITOME  OF  THE  AUTHOR'S    LIFE   &  OF  HIS 
ARIVAL  IN  AMERICA. 

As  IT  is  possible  that  in  some  future  age  this  part 
of  the  Earth  will  be  inhabited  by  Europians  &  a  his 
tory  of  its  present  inhabitants  would  be  a  valuable 
acquisition  I  proceed  to  write  one  &  deposit  it  in  a 
box  secured  -  -  -  so  that  the  ravages  of  time  will 
have  no  effect  upon  it  that  you  may  know  the  author 
I  will  give  a  succint  account  of  his  life  and  of  the 
cause  of  his  arival  which  I  have  extracted  from  a 
manuscript  which  will  be  deposited  with  this  history. 

My  name  was  is  Fabius  The  family  name  I  sustain 
is  Fabius,  being  decended  from  the  illustrious  general 
of  that  name.  I  was  born  at  Rome  &  received 
my  education  under  the  tuition  of  a  very  Learned 
Master.  At  the  time  that  Constantine  arived  at  that 
city  and  had  overcome  his  enimies  &  and  was  firmly 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY.'9  15 

seated  on  the  throne  of  the  Roman  empire  I  was 
introduced  to  him  as  a  young  Gentleman  of  genius 
and  learning  &  as  bevig  worthy  of  the  favourable 
notice  of  his  imperial  majesty.  He  gave  me  the 
appointment  of  one  of  his  secritaries,  &  such  were 
the  gracious  intimations  which  he  frequently  gave 
me  of  his  high  approbation  of  my  conduct  that  I  was 
happy  in  my  station. 

One  day  he  says  to  me  Fabius  you  must  go  to 
Brittian  &  carry  an  important  -  -  -  to  the  general  of 
our  army  there  -  -  -  sail  in  a  vessel  &  return  when 
she  returns.  Preparation  was  made  instantly  and  we 
sailed  -  -  -  The  vessel  laden  with  provisions  for  the 
army  -  -  -  Cloath -knives  and  other  impliments  for 
their  use  had  now  arived  near  the  coast  of  Britain 
when  a  tremendous  storm  arose  &  drove  us  into  the 
midst  of  the  boundless  Ocean.  Soon  the  whole  crew 
became  lost  &  bewildered.  They  knew  not  the  direc 
tion  for  to  the  rising  Sun  or  polar  Star,  for  the  heav 
ens  were  covered  with  clouds;  &  darkness  had  spread 
her  sable  mantle  over  the  face  of  the  raging  deep. 
Their  minds  were  filled  with  consternation  and 
despair.  &  unanimously  agreed  that  What  could  we  do? 
How  be  exfrecated  from  the  insatiable  jaws  of  a 
watry  tomb.  Then  it  was  that  we  felt  our  absolute 
dependence  on  that  Almighty  &  gracious  Being  who 
holds  the  winds  &  floods  in  -  -  hands.  From  him 
alone  could  we  expect  deliverance.  To  him  our  most 
fervent  desires  assended.  Prostrate  <fc  on  bended 
nees  we  poured  forth  incessant  Supplication  &  even 
Old  Ocean  appeared  to  sympathize  in  our  distress  by 
returning  the  echo  of  our  vociforos  Cries  &  lamenta- 


16  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

tions.  After  being  driven  five  days  with  incridable 
velocity  before  the  furious  wind  the  storm  abated  in 
its  violance.  but  still  the  strong  wind  blew  strong 
in  the  strong  as  I  now  believe  in  the  same  direction. 
Doubtful  whether  the  wind  had  not  changed  her  point 
we  give  the  ship  full  sail  &  let  her  drive.  On  the 
sixth  day  after,  the  storm  wholly  subsided,  the  sun 
rose  clear  and  the  heavens  once  more  appeared 
to  smile.  Inexpressible  was  the  consternation  of  all 
the  crew,  they  found  themselves  in  the  midst  of  a 
vast  Ocean.  No  prospect  of  returning.  All  was 
lost.  The  wind  blowing  westwardly,  &  the  presump 
tion  was  that  it  had  been  blowing  in  that  direc 
tion  during  the  whole  of  the  storm.  No  pen  can 
paint  the  dolorious  cries  &  lamentations  of  the 
poor  mariners^  for  the  loss  of  friends  for  the  loss 
of  everything  they  held  most  -  -  -  At  length  a 
Mariner  stept  -  -  -  the  midst  and  proclaimed. 
Attend  O  friends  &  listen  to  my  words.  A  voice  from 
on  high  hath  penetrated  my  soul  &  the  inspiration  of 
the  Almighty  hath  bid  me  proclaim.  Let  your  sails 
be  wide  spread  &  the  gentle  winds  will  soon  waft  you 
into  a  safe  harbor,  a  Country  where  you  will  find 
hospitality.  Quick  as  the  lightnings  flash  joy 
sparkled  in  every  countenance.  A  Hymn  of  Thanks 
giving  spontaniously  burst  forth  from  their  lips.  In 
full  confidence  that  the  divine  prediction  would  be 
accomplished  they  extoled  the  loving  kindness  and 
tender  mercies  of  their  God  &  promised  by  the  assist 
ance  of  his  grace  to  make  ample  return  of  Gratitude. 
On  the  fifth  day  after  this  we  came  in  sight  of  sand, 
we  entered  a  spacious  river  &  continued  sailing  up 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  17 

the  -  -  -  many  leagues  until  we  came  in  view  of  a 
town.  Every  heart  now  palpitated  with  joy,  <fc  loud 
shouts  of  gladness  expressed  the  enthusiastic  trans 
ports  of  our  souls.  We  anchored  within  a  small  dis 
tance  from  shore.  Immediately  the  natives  ran  with 
apparent  signs  of  surprize  &  astonishment  to  the  bank 
of  the  River.  After  viewing  us  for  some  time,  & 
receiving  signs  of  Friendship,  they  appeared  to  hold 
a  counsel  for  a  few  minutes.  Their  King  then  stept 
forward  to  the  edge  of  the  bank,  &  proffered  us  the 
hand  of  friendship,  &  by  significant  gestures  invited 
us  to  Land,  promising  us  protection  and  hospitality 
We  now  found  ourselves  once  more  on  terra  firma,  & 
were  conducted  by  the  king  <fe  four  chiefs  into  the 
town  whilst  the  multitude  followed  after,  shouting 
<fc  performing  many  odd  jesticulations.  The  King 
ordered  an  entertainment  to  be  prepared  for  his  new 
friends  which  consisted  of  -  -  -  fish  boiled  beans 
<fc  samp  -  -  -  The  whole  was  placed  under  a  wide- 
spreading  Oak  in  wooden  dishes  A  large  clam  shell  & 
a  Stone  Knife  were  provided  for  each  one.  The  king 
then  came  forward  with  about  twenty  of  his  principal 
subjects,  &  con  seated  us  (being  about  twenty  in 
number)  &  seated  us  by  the  side  of  our  repast.  He 
<fc  his  company  then  took  seats  in  front.  After 
waving  his  hand  &  bowing  all  fell  to  eating  &  a  more 
delicious  repast  we  never  enjoyed.  The  repast  being 
finished,  our  attention  was  called  to  a  collection  of 
about  one  thousand  men  &  women  who  had  formed  a 
ring  &  invited  our  company  to  come  forward  into  the 
midst.  After  gazing  upon  us  sometime  with  surprize 
we  were  permitted  to  withdraw  &  to  take  our  stand  in 


18  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

the  Ring.  About  forty  in  number  then  walked  into 
the  midle  of  the  Ring  &  began  a  song  with  but  a  dis 
cordant  and  hedious  modification  of  sounds,  &  such 
frantic  jesticulations  of  body  that  it  seemed  that 
chaos  had  bro't  her  furies  to  set  the  world  in  an 
uproar.  And  an  uproar  it  was  in  a  short  time  for  the 
whole  company  fell  to  dancing,  shouting,  whooping, 
&  screaming  at  intervals,  then  dancing  jumping  & 
tumbling  with  many  indescribable  distortions  in  their 
countanance  &  indelicate  jestures.  In  fact,  they 
appeared  more  lik  a  company  of  devils  than  human 
Beings.  This  lasted  about  one  hour.  They  then 
took  their  places  in  a  circle  &  at  a  signal  given  gave 
three  most  tremendous  whoops,  they  then  instantly 
dispersed  playing  many  antike  capers  &  making  such 
a  confused  medly  of  sound  by  skreaming,  whooping, 
screaching  like  owls,  Barking  like  dogs  &  wolves  & 
bellowing  croaking  like  Bullfrogs,  that  my  brain 
seemed  to  be  turned  topseturvy,  &  for  some  time  I 
could  scarce  believe  that  they  belonged  to  the  human 
species. 

CHAPT.  II 

AN   ACCOUNT   OF  THE   SETTLEMENT   OF  THE   SHIP'S 
COMPANY   &  MANY  PARTICULARS  RESPECT 
ING  THE   NATIVES. 

As  no  alternative  now  remained  but  either  to  make 
the  desperate  attempt  to  return  across  the  wide  bois- 
trous  Ocean,  or  to  take  up  our  residence  in  a  country 
in  a  land  of  savages  inhabited  by  savages  &  wild 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  19 

ferocious  beasts,  we  did  not  long  hesitate.  We  held 
a  solemn  treaty  with  the  King  &  all  the  chiefs  of  his 
nation.  They  agreed  to  cede  to  us  a  tract  of  excel 
lent  land  on  the  north  part  of  the  town  on  which  was 
six  wigwams  &  engaged  perpetual  amity  &  hospitality 
&  the  protection  of  our  lives  &  property.  In  consid 
eration  of  this  grant  we  cave  them  fifty  yards  of 
scarlet  cloth  &  fifty  knives  With  this  present  they 
were  highly  pleased. 

Arrangements  must  now  be  made  for  -  -  -  set 
tlement.  Vessel  &  cargo  had  received  no  material 
damage  &  by  striping  the  vessel  of  its  plank  we  could 
erect  a  house  in  which  we  could  deposite  the  whole 
cargo  in  safety.  All  hands  were  immediately  em 
ployed,  some  in  procuring  timber  which  we  hued  on 
two  sides  &  then  locked  together,  some  in  procuring 
shingles  &  some  in  striping  the  vessel  of  its  plank;  & 
having  a  large  quantity  of  nails  on  board,  in  ten 
days  we  finished  a  very  convenient  store-house,  suffi 
ciently  spacious  to  receive  the  whole  cargo.  We  also 
built  a  small  house  adjoining  which  was  to  be  the 
habitation  of  the  Captain  &  myself.  Having  secured 
all  our  property,  we  then  found  it  necessary  to  estab 
lish  some  regulations  for  the  government  of  our  little 
society.  The  Captain  whose  name  was  Lucian  & 
myself  were  appointed  judges  in  all  matters  of  con 
troversy  &  managers  of  the  public  property  to  make 
bargains  with  i/he  natives  &  barter  such  articles  as 
we  did  not  need  for  necessaries.  As  we  all  professed 
The  next  thing  to  be  done  was  to  to  believe  in  the 
religion  of  ^Jesus  Christ  we  unanimously  chose  Tro- 


20  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

janus,  the  mate  of  the  ship,  a  pious  good  man  to  be 
our  minister,  to  lead  our  devotions  every  morning  & 
evening  &  on  the  Lords  day 

But  now  a  most  singular  &  delicate  subject  pre 
sented  itself  for  consideration.  Seven  young  women 
we  had  on  board  as  passenjers  to  viset  certain  friends 
in  Brittian.  Three  of  them  were  ladies  of  rank  &  the 
rest  were  healthy  bucksom  lassies.  Whilst  deliber 
ating  on  this  subject  a  mariner  arose  whom  we  called 
Droll  Tom  Hark  ye,  shipmates  says  he.  Whilst 
tossed  on  the  foming  billows  what  brave  son  of 
Neptune  had  any  more  regard  for  a  woman  than  a 
Sturgeon,  but  now  we  are  all  safely  anchored  on 
Terra  firma,  our  sails  furled  &  ship  keeled  up,  I 
have  a  huge  longing  for  some  of  those  rosy  dames. 
But  willing  to  take  my  chance  with  my  shipmates,  I 
propose  that  they  should  make  their  choice  of  hus 
bands.  The  plan  was  instantly  adopted.  As  the 
choice  fell  on  the  young  women  they  had  a  consul 
tation  on  the  subject,  <fc  in  a  short  time  made 
known  the  result.  Droll  Tom  was  rewarded  for 
his  benevolent  proposal  with  one  of  the  most 
sprightly,  rosy  dames  in  the  company.  Three  other 
of  the  most  cheerful,  resolute  mariners  were  chosen 
by  the  other  three  bucksom  Lassies.  The  three 
young  Ladies  of  rank  fixed  their  choice  on  the 
Captain  the  Mate  &  myself.  Happy  indeed  in  my 
partner,  I  had  formed^  an  high  esteem  of  the  excel- 
lent  qualities  of  her  mind  The  young  Lady  who 
chose  me  for  a  partner  was  possessed  of  every 
attractive  charm  both  of  body  &  mind.  We  united 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  21 

heart  A  hand  with  the  fairest  prospect  of  enjoy 
ing  every  delight  &  gratification  which  are  attend 
ant  on  the  connubial  state.  Thus  ended  the  affair. 
You  may  well  conceive  our  singular  situation.  The 
six  poor  fellows  who  were  doomed  to  live  in  a  state 
of  celibacy  or  accept  of  savage  dames,  discovered 
a  little  chagrin  &  anxiety.  However,  they  consoled 
themselves  with  the  idea  of  living  in  families,  where 
they  would  enjoy  the  company  of  the  fair  sex,  <fc 
be  relieved  from  the  work  which  belongs  to  the 
department  of  women. 

Our  community  might  be  said  to  be  one  family, 
tho'  we  lived  in  separate  houses  situate  near  each 
other  The  property  was  common  stock.  what 
was  produced  by  our  labor  was  likewise  to  be  com 
mon.  All  subject  to  the  distribution  of  the  judges, 
who  were  to  attend  to  each  family  &  to  see  that 
propper  industry  &  econimy  were  practised  by  all. 

The  Captain  &  myself,  attended  with  our  fair  part 
ners  &  two  mariners,  repaired  to  the  new  habitation, 
which  consisted  of.  two  convenient  apartments. 
After  having  partook  of  an  elligant  dinner  &  drank  a 
bottle  of  excellent  wine  our  Spirits  were  exhilerated 
&  the  deep  gloom  which  beclouded  our  minds  evapo 
rated.  The  Captain  assuming  his  wonted  cheerful 
ness,  rnada  the  following  address.  "My  sweet,  good 
"soul'd  fellows,  we  have  now  commenced  a  new  voy- 
1  'age.  Not  such  as  bro't  us  over  mountain  billows  to 
"this  butt  end  of  the  world.  No,  no,  our  voige  is  on 
"dry  land,  <fc  now  we  must  take  care  that  we  have 
"sufficient  ballast  for  the  riging.  Every  hand  on 
"board  this  ship  must  clasp  hands  &  condesend  to  each 


22  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

"others  humour.  This  will  promote  good  cheer  & 
"smooth  the  raging  billows  of  life.  Surrounded  by 
"innumerable  hordes  of  human  beings,  who  resemble 
"in  manners  the  Orang  outang,  let  us  keep  aloof 
"from  them  &  not  embark  in  the  same  matrimonial 
"ship  with  them.  At  the  same  time,  we  will  treat 
"them  with  good  cheer  &  inlighten  their  dark  souls 
"with  good  instruction.  By  continuing  a  different 
"people  &  prefering  our  customs,  manners,  religion 
"&  arts  &  sciences  &  other  things  another  Italy  will 
"grow  up  in  this  wilderness,  &  we  shall  be  celebrated 
"as  the  fathers  of  a  great  &  happy  nation." 

May  God  bless  your  soul,  says  one  of  the  mariners, 
what  would  you  have  us  do  who  have  had  the  woful 
luck  not  to  get  mates,  to  cheer  our  poor  souls  & 
warm  our  bodies.  Methinks  I  could  pick  out  a 
healthy  plum  Lass  from  the  copper  colored  tr;be  that 
by  washing  &  scrubing  her  fore  &  aft  &  upon  the 
labbord  &  stabbord  sides  she  would  become  a  whole 
some  bedfellow.  I  think,  may  it  please  your  honour, 
that  I  could  gradually  pump  my  notions  into  her 
head  &  make  her  a  good  shipmate  for  the  cupboard  & 
as  good  hearted  a  Christian  as  any  of  your  white 
damsels  &  upon  my  Soul  I  warrant  you  if  we  have 
children,  by  feeding  them  with  good  fare,  &  keeping 
them  clean,  they  will  be  as  plump  &  as  fair  &  nearly 
as  white  as  your  your  honours  children.  Upon  this  I 
filled  the  bottle  with  wine  &  observing  to  honest  Crito 
that  he  was  at  liberty  to  make  the  experiment  if  he 
could  find  a  fair  -  -  -  to  his  liking.  I  then 
expressed  the  the  sweet  pleasure  I  received  from  the 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  23 

addresses  of  the  speakers  A  wished  drank  success  to 
the  new  voige.  All  drank  plentifully,  &  the  exhil- 
eration  produced  the  greatest  cheerfulness  &  hilarity. 
By  this  time  the  Sun  had  hid  his  head  below  the 
horizon  &  darkness  invited  all  the  animal  creation  to 
sleep  &  rest.  We  retired  two  &  two,  hand  in  hand. 
Ladies  heads  a  little  awri,  blushing  like  the  morn  <fc 
....  But  I  forgot  to  mention  that  our  society 
passed  a  resolution  to  build  a  church  in  the  in  the 
midst  of  our  vilage. 

CHAPT.  III. 

MANY   PARTICULARS  RESPECTING  THE  NATIVES. 

INTEREST  as  well  as  curiosity  invited  an  acquaint 
ance  with  our  new  neighbours.  They  were  called  in 
their  Language  Deliwanucks.  They  were  Tall,  bodies 
weel  proportioned,  strait  limbs,  complections  of  a 
brownish  hue  broad  cheek  bones,  black  wild  roling 
eyes,  &  hair  black  &  course.  To  strangers  they  were 
both  -  -  -  true  to  their  engagements,  ardent  in  their 
friendship,  but  to  enimies  implacable,  cruel  <fe  bar 
barous  in  the  extreme.  Innumerable  hordes  of  this 
description  of  people  were  scattered  over  an  exten 
sive  country,  who  gained  their  living  by  hunting  the 
elk,  the  deer  &  a  great  variety  of  other  wild  animals 
by  fishing  &  fowling  &  by  raising  corn,  beans  & 
squashes  Shooting  the  arrow,  flinging  stones,  wres 
tling,  jumping,  hoping,  and  runing  were  their  princi 
pal  amusements,  &  prizes  would  often  be  staked  as  a 
reward  to  the  conqueror.  Their  cloathing  consisted 
of  skins  dressed  with  the  hair  on,  but  in  warm 


24  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

weather  only  the  middle  part  of  their  bodies  were 
incumbered  with  any  covering.  The  one  half  of  the 
head  of  the  men  was  shaved  &  painted  with  red  &  the 
one  half  of  the  face  was  painted  with  black.  The 
head  was  adorned  with  feathers  of  various  kinds,  & 
their  ears  &  noses  were  adorned  ornamented  with 
rings  formed  formed  from  the  sinues  of  certain  ani 
mals,  on  which  were  suspended  smooth  stones  of 
different  coulors.  Thus  cloathed,  thus  painted,  thus 
ornimented,  the  Deliwannuck  made  a  most  terrif 
-  -  -  They  held  festivals  at  stated  times  which 
varied  in  the  manner  of  conducting  them,  according 
to  the  object  they  had  in  view.  At  one  of  their 
annual  festivals  their  ceremonies  were  particularly 
singular  &  different  from  any  that  were  ever  practised 
by  any  nation.  Here  a  description  would  give  us 
some  idea  of  their  religion,  &  would  gratify  the  curi 
osity  of  an  injenious  mind. 

When  the  time  arives,  which  is  in  September,  the 
who  whole  tribe  assemble.  They  are  dressed  &  orni 
mented  in  the  highest  fashion.  The  women  in  par 
ticular  have  their  garments  &  heads  so  adorned  with 
feathers,  shells,  &  wampum,  that  they  make  a  very 
brilliant  &  grotesque  appearance.  The  form  a  cir 
cle:  their  countanances  are  solemn.  A  Speaker 
mounts  a  stage  in  the  midst.  At  this  moment  two 
Black  Dogs  led  by  two  Boys  &  two  white  Dogs 
led  by  two  young  damsels  enter  the  circle  &  are 
tied  together.  The  Speaker  then  extended  his 
hands  &  spoke.  Hail,  ye  favorite  children  of  the 
great  and  good  Spirit,  who  resides  in  the  Sun 


<£     I  IBRA^Y 

THE  "MANUSCRIPT  -STO/M***'  ' 

who  18  the  father  of  all  living,  creatures  &  whose 
arms  encircle  us  all  around,  who'x^f^rida  us  from 
the  malicious  design  of  that  great 
that  pours  upon  us  all  the  evils  we  endure  He 
gives  us  all  our  meat  <fe  our  life  &  causes  the 
corn  &  the  fruits  to  spring  up  &  makes  us  to  rejoice 
in  his  goodness.  He  hath  prepared  a  delightful 
Country  to  receive  us,  if  we  are  valiant  in  battle  or 
are  benevolent  <fe  good.  There  we  can  pick  all 
kinds  of  delicious  fruit,  &  have  game  &  fish  in 
abundance  <fc  our  women  being  improved  in  beauty 
&  sprightliness  will  cause  our  hearts  to  dance  with 
delight.  But  wo  unto  you  wicked,  malicious  mis 
chievous  mortals.  Your  lot  will  be  cast  in  a  dark 
dreary,  mirey  swamp,  where  the  malignant  Spirit 
will  torment  you  with  musquetoes  &  serpents  &  will 
give  you  nothing  to  eat  but  toads,  frogs  &  snails. 
But  my  dear  friends,  all  hail,  here  is  a  custom 
which  is  sanctioned  by  time  immemorial.  Look 
steadfastly  on  the  black  dogs  &  let  not  your  eyes 
be  turned  away,  when  they  are  thrown  on  the 
sacred  pile  <fe  the  flames  are  furiously  consuming 
their  bodies,  then  let  your  earnest  prayer  assend 
for  pardon  &  your  transgressions  will  flee  away 
like  shadows  &  your  sins  will  be  carried  by  the 
smoke  into  the  shades  of  oblivion.  When  this  sol 
emn  expiatory  sacrifice  is  ended,  then  prepare  your 
souls  to  partake  of  the  holy  festival  Each  one  will 
receive  a  precious  morsel  from  these  immaculate 
snow  colored  dogs,  in  token  that  your  offences  have 
all  evaporated  in  the  smoke  of  the  holy  sacrifice. 
&  that  you  are  thankful  to  him  the  benevolent 


26'  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

Spirit,  for  the  abundance  of  good  things  that  you 
enjoy,  &  that  you  humbly  anticipate  the  continu 
ance  of  his  blessing  that  he  will  defend  you  against 
the  evil  designs  of  that  malignant  Spirit,  who  gives 
us  gawl  &  wormwood,  &  fills  our  bosom  with  pain 
&  our  eyes  with  tears.  He  then  proclaimed,  let  the 
sacred  pile  be  erected  &  the  solemn  sacrifice  per 
formed.  Instantly  about  one  hundred  men  come 
forward  with  small  dry  wood  &  bundles  of  dry  sticks 
&  having  thrown  them  in  one  pile  within  the  circle, 
they  set  the  pile  on  fire.  The  black  dogs  were 
knocked  on  the  middle  head,  &  thrown  on  the 
top,-  in  a  moment  all  was  in  a  blaze  &  the  flames 
assended  in  curls  to  heaven.  The  whole  company 
assumed  the  most  devout  attitude  &  muttered  in 
sounds  almost  inarticulate  their  humble  confession 
&  earnest  requests. 

When  the  dogs  were  consumed  &  the  fire  nearly 
extinguished,  the  ceremonies  of  their  sacred  festival 
began.  The  white  dogs  which  were  very  plump  & 
fat  were  knocked  on  the  head  &  their  throats  cut. 
Their  hair  was  then  singed  off,  having  first  their 
entrails  taken  out,  &  being  suspended  by  the  nose 
before  a  hot  fire,  they  were  soon  roasted,  thrown 
upon  a  long  table  &  desected  into  as  many  pieces  as 
there  were  persons  to  swallow  them.  The  company 
immediately  formed  a  procession,  one  rank  of  men 
the  other  of  women,  the  men  marching  to  the  left  & 
the  women  to  the  right  of  the  table,  each  one  took  a 
piece  &  devoured  it  with  as  good  a  -  -  -  if  it  had 
been  the  most  delicious  moreel.  Having  completed 
these  sacred  ceremonies  with  great  solemnity,  the 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY.'1  27 

whole  company  formed  themselves  into  a  compact 
circle  round  the  stage  ten  musitians  immediately 
mounted,  &  facing  the  multitude  on  every  side  sang  a 
song.  The  tune  &  the  musical  voices  of  the  singers 
pleased  the  ear,  whilst  the  imagination  was  delighted 
with  the  poetic  inginuity  of  the  composition.  The 
multitude  all  joined  in  the  chorus  with  voice  so  loud 
&  multifarious,  that  the  atmosphere  quaked  with  ter 
ror,  &  woods  &  neighbouring  hills  sent  back  by  way 
of  mockery,  sent  back  the  sound  of  their  voices, 
their  vociferation  improved  by  ten -fold  confusion. 
Perhaps,  reader,  you  have  the  curiosity  to  hear  the 
song.  I  can  give  you  only  the  last  stanzy  &  the 
chorus. 

"For  us  the  sun  emits  his  rais 
"The  moon  shines  forth  for  our  delight. 
"The  stars  shine  forth  extol  our  heroes  praia 
"And  warriors  flee  before  our  sight. 

CHORUS. 

"Delawan  to  chakee  poloo 
"Manegengo  forwah  toloo 
"Chanepant,  lawango  chapah 
"Quinebogan  hamboo  gowah. 

The  solemnities  are  ended  &  in  their  opinion  their 
poor  souls  are  compleatly  whitewashed  &  every  stain 
entirely  effaced.  A  little  -  -  -  will  now  dissipate 
the  solemnity  &  inspire  them  with  cheerfulness  & 
meriment.  The  whole  tribe  repair  to  the  top  of  an 
hill,  at  one  place  their  is  a  gradual  slope  a  small  dis 
tance,  <fc  then  it  desends  about  twenty-five  feet  in  an 
almost  perpendicular  direction,  at  the  bottom  of 
which  is  a  quagmire  which  is  about  ten  feet  in  length. 


28  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

&  the  soft  mud  is  about  three  feet  deep.  At  each 
end  the  ground  is  soft,  but  not  miry.  Down  this 
declivity  twenty  pair  of  very  suple  &  sprightly  young 
men  &  women  are  to  desend.  If  by  their  dexterity 
&  agility  they  escape  the  quagmire,  a  piece  of  wam 
pum  will  be  the  reward  of  each  fortunate  champion ; 
but  if  they  plunge  in  their  recompense  will  be  the 
ridicule  of  the  multitude.  In  making  this  desent,  six 
young  women  &  five  young  men  by  a  surprizing 
dexterity  in  whirling  their  bodies  as  they  desended, 
cleared  themselves  from  the  quagmire.  The  rest  as 
their  turn  came,  plunged  in  &  came  out  most  wofully 
muded  to  the  great  diversion  of  the  Spectators.  The 
incident  which  excited  the  most  meriment,  hapned 
when  the  last  pair  desended.  by  an  unlucky  spring  to 
clear  himself  from  the  quagmire  he  bro't  his  body 
alongside  of  the  declivity  &  roled  his  whole  length 
into  the  midst  of  the  quagmire,  where  he  lay  his 
whole  length  in  an  horizontaj^position  on  his  back 
neither  heels  nor  head  up,  but  horizontally,  soft  & 
easy,  but  alas,  when  one  unlucky  event  happens 
another  follows  close  on  its  heals,  the  fair-plump 
corpulent  damsel  his  affectionate  sweetheart  came 
instantly  sliding  with  great  velocity.  She  saw  the 
woful  position  of  her  beloved.  She  wished  him  no 
harm,  she  raised  her  feet,  this  bro't  the  center  of 
gravity  directly  over  the  center  of  his  head,  here  she 
rested  a  moment,  his  head  sunk,  she  sunk  after  him, 
his  heels  kicked  against  the  wind  like  Jeshuran 
waxed  fat,  but  not  a  word  from  his  lips,  but  his  ideas 
came  in  quick  succession,  tho't  he,  what  a  disgrace 
to  die  here  in  the  mud  under  the  pressure  of  my 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  29 

sweet  heart,  however  his  time  for  such  reflections 
were  short,  the  tender  hearted  maid  collecting  all  her 
agility  in  one  "effort,  dismounted  &  found  herself  on 
dry  land  in  an  instant,  not  a  moment  to  be  lost.  She 
seized  her  lover  by  one  leg,  &  draged  him  from  the 
mud,  a  curious  figure  extending  about  six  feet  six 
inches  on  the  ground,  all  besmeared  from  head  to 
foot,  spitting,  puffing,  panting  &  struggling  for 
breath.  Poor  man,  the  whole  multitude  laughing  at 
thy  calamity,  shouting  ridiculing,  none  to  give  thee 
consolation  but  thy  loving  &  sympathetic  partner 
in  misfortune. 

Upon  my  soul,  exclaims  1  >n»ll  T«>m.  Stoni  f<>rem<^t. 
That  bouncing  Lass  ought  to  have  the  highest  prize 
for  drawing  her  ship  from  the  mud.  She  was  clean 
ing  the  filth  from  his  faoe. 

CHAPT.   IV. 

A  JOURNEY   TO    THE  N.   W.    &  REMOVALL 

Gracious  God!  how  deplorable  our  situation  Are  we 
doomed  to  dwell  among  hordes  of  savages  <fc  be 
deprived  of  all  intercourse  with  friends  &  the  civilized 
world?  &  what  will  be  the  situation  of  our  offspring? 
Will  they  preserve  our  customs  <fc  manners,  cultivate 
the  arts  &  sciences  &  maintain  our  holy  religion;  or 
i-athtT  will  they  not  rather  degenerate  into  savages  & 
by  mingling  with  them  become  the  most  -  -  -  race 
of  beings  in  existence.  Who  can  indure  such  reflec 
tion,  such  heart-rending  anticipation?  They  pour 
upon  my  soul  like  a  flood  &  bear  me  down  with  the 
weight  of  a  milstone.  O  that  my  head  were  water,  & 


30  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

my  eyes  a  fountain  of  tears,  Then  my  intolerable 
burthen  should  should  be  poured  forth  in  a  torrent  & 
my  soul  set  at  liberty.  But  behold  the  light  springs 
up  &  beams  upon  my  soul.  She  brings  in  her  train 
Hope  that  celestial  Codes,  that  sure  &  strong  anchor 
that  dispenser  of  comfort  &  pleasing  anticipation,  & 
that  dispeller  of  corroding  grief  &  blank  dispair.  She 
bids  me  review  the  exploded  reasoning  of  of  a  great 
philosopher  &  compare  it  with  my  own  observations, 
perhaps  the  result  will  point  out  a  safe  road  to  the 
land  of  our  nativity. 

Thus  I  reasoned  respecting  the  solar  system  of 
which  the  earth  is  a  part.  Provided  the  earth  is  sta 
tionary  according  to  the  present  system  of  philoso 
phy,  then  the  sun  the  moon  &  the  plannets,  being  at 
an  immense  distance  from  the  earth,  must  perform 
their  revolutions  around  her  with  inconceivable 
velocity;  Whereas,  if  according  to  the  platonio  sys 
tem,  the  earth  is  a  globe  &  the  sun  is  stationary,  then 
the  earth  by  a  moderate  velocity  -  -  -  perform  her 
revolutions.  This  scheme  will  represent  the  solar 
system  as  displaying  the  transendant  wisdom  of  its 
Almighty  architect,  for  in  this  we  behold  the  Sun 
suspended  by  Onmipotence  &  all  the  plannets  moving 
round  him  as  their  common  center  in  exact  order  & 
harmony.  In  this  we  can  easily  account  for  days  & 
nights  &  the  diferent  seasons  of  the  year.  When  the 
earth  presents  one  part  of  her  face  to  the  sun  it  is 
day,  &  when  that  part  is  turned  from  his  beams  it  is 
night.  When  she  varies  to  the  South  the  sun  shines 
upon  us  in  a  more  perpendicular  direction,  the  sun 
beams  become  more  dense  &  the  heat  increases,  as 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  31 

she  turns  back  the  heat  decreases  in  proportion  as 
this  part  of  the  earth  looses  its  perpendicular  direc 
tion,  <fc  to  the  sun  &  the  cold  becomes  more  intense  in 
the  same  proportion.  This  account  for  the  various 
seasons  of  the  year  appears  correct  &  consistent  & 
highly  honourable  to  the  divine  perfection. 

But  behold  the  other  system.  The  earth  firmly 
fixed  on  a  firm  foundation,  perhaps  a  stone,  some  say 
on  a  giants  back  who  stands  on  a  -  -  -  back.  Its 
surface  widely  extends  nearly  horizontal,  <fc  its  cut 
down  <fc  its  sides  cut  down  Btrait  or  perpendicular  to 
the  the  very  bottom,  below  which  is  a  fathomless 
abis8.  Pray,  Mr.  Philosopher,  what  man  was  ever 
there  &  looked  down  &  what  prevents  the  Ocean, 
u  n  1  ess  it  is  damd  with  earth  &  rooka,  from  pouring 
down  A-  loosing  itsr'f  in  this  ImrnMe  a)>in?  IUit  h<>\v 
expensive  is  this  teraqueous  surface?  Indeed  I  am  of 
opinion  if  this  system  is  true,  I  am  nearly  at  one  end 
of  it.  But  the  hipothises  is  too  absurd  &  inconsistent. 
The  earth  must  be  of  a  spherical  form  <fc  a  westerly 
course  will  lead  us  to  the  land  of  our  nativity.  Per 
haps  this  is  a  par!  of  the  eastern  foiitiiit'iit,  <>r  j.er- 
haps  only  a  narrow  strip  of  the  Ocean  intervenes? 
On  no  other  principle  can  we  account  for  the  emigra 
tion  of  the  ancestors  of  these  innumerable  hords  of 
human  beings  that  possess  this  continent.  Their 
tradition  is  that  their  ancestors  came  from  the  west, 
&  they  agree  in  their  information  that  at  the  distance 
of  fifteen  days  journey  in  >  westernly  direction  there 


32  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

are  nations  vastly  more  numerous,  powerful  <fc  civil  - 
ized  than  themselves. 

The  earth  therefore  must  be  of  a  spherical  form 
a  Globe  &  a  westerly  course  will  lead  us  to  the  land 
of  our  nativity.  On  what  principle  can  we  account 
for  emigration  of  the  ancestors  of  these  innumer 
able  hords  of  human  beings  that  possess  this 
Continent?  Their  tradition  tells  them  that  they  emi 
grated  from  the  westward.  From  this  I  draw  the 
conclusion  that  the  sea  if  any,  which  intervenes 
between  the  two  Continents  at  the  westward  is  not 
so  extensive  but  that  it  may  be  safely  navigated 
I  have  also  learnt  from  some  of  the  natives  We 
are  also  informed  by  some  of  the  natives  that  at 
the  distance  of  about  fifteen  days  journey  in  a 
north  westerly  course  there  is  a  great  river  which 
runs  in  a  south  westerly  direction,  they  can  not  tell 
how  far  &  that  along  the  banks  of  this  river  there 
are  great  towns  &  mighty  kings  &  a  people  who 
live  in  a  state  of  civilation.  From  all  these  con  7 
siderations  I  am  determined  to  remove,  pursue  a 
westerly  course,  &  seek  the  delightful  country  of  my 
ancestors.  I  immediately  communicated  my  deter 
mination  &  the  reasons  on  which  it  was  founded  to 
our  little  Society,  who  joyfully  acquiessed.  It  was 
thot  to  be  the  most  prudential  to  find  out  the  dis 
position  &  character  of  the  inhabitants,  who  were 
settled  along  the  great  River  lest  we  should  fall  into 
the  hands  of  Robbers.  For  this  purpose  my  man 
Crito  &  myself  &  a  Delawan  for  an  interpreter  set 
forth.  We  passed  thro*  a  country  interspersed  with 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  33 

vilages,  inhabited  by  the  same  kind  of  people  as 
the  Delawans,  until  we  came  to  a  great  Mountain. 
Having  passed  over  this,  we  had  not  traveled  far 
before  we  came  to  the  confluence  of  two  great  rivers 
which  in  conjunction  produced  a  river  which  was 
called  Owaho,  deep  enough  for  the  navigation  of 
ships.  Here  was  a  lagge  town  or  city  inhabited  by 
a  different  race  of  people  from  any  we  had  seen 
before.  We  were  immediately  conducted  to  the  King 
&  were  received  who  received  us  very  graciously, 
&  having  asked  a  number  of  very  pertinent  ques 
tions  <fc  received  answer  to  his  satisfaction,  I  then 
made  known  to  him  our  business  &  had  all  my 
requests  granted.  As  we  proposed  to  move  into  his 
territory,  he  offered  to  furnish  us  for  our  conven 
ience,  with  four  Mammoons  A  four  men  to  manage 
them.  These  were  an  animal  of  prodigious  magni 
tude  even  biger  than  the  elephant,  which  the 
natives  had  tamed  <fc  domesticated.  They  were  very 
sagacious  &  docile  &  were  employed  in  carying 
burthens  &  in  drawing  timber  &  in  plowing  their 
land.  Their  hair  at  the  Spring  season  was  about 
seven  inches  in  length,  &  was  of  a  fine  wooly  con 
sistence,  &  being  sheared  off  at  the  proper  season, 
was  manufactured  into  course  cloath.  And  the  milk 
of  the  female  which  they  produced  in  abundance, 
afforded  a  very  wholesome  nutriment.  Having  thus 
succeeded  beyond  our  expectations,  we  made  as 
much  expidition  to  return  as  possible.  We  arrived 
in  safety  without  any  material  accidents.  The  Lit 
tle  Society  I  had  left  were  greatly  rejoiced  at  our 
returne,  <fc  highly  pleased  with  the  account  we  gave 


34  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY.'1 

of  the  country  we  had  visited,  &  at  the  sight  of 
those  extraordinary  &  prodigious  animals  Mammoons 
which  we  had  bro't  to  convey  our  baggage.  No 
time  was  lost  to  make  preparation  for  the  journey. 
The  Captain,  Mate  &  myself  went  to  the  King  &  held 
a  conference  with  him  &  the  chiefs  &  obtained  leave 
to  depart,  tho'  with  apparent  regret  &  reluctance. 
Sacks  were  provided  from  course  cloth  to  receive 
the  most  valuable  part  of  our  goods  &  furniture. 
These  were  thrown  across  three  of  the  Mammoons 
The  other  was  caparisoned  in  a  manner  too  tedious 
to  describe  for  the  accommodation  of  our  women  & 
children.  They  were  all  mounted  upon  him  &  rode 
with  great  convenience  &  safety.  Being  thus  pre 
pared  &  ready  Thus  having  resided  among  the  Deli- 
wans  two  years,  &  being  prepared  to  take  our  depart 
ure.  The  King  &  his  chiefs  &  many  of  his  principal 
Subjects  came  forward  to  take  an  affectionate  fare 
well.  This  was  done  on  both  sides  with  with  mutual 
expressions  of  the  most  ardent  &  sincere  friendship 
&  the  most  earnest  wishes  &  prayers  for  future  pros 
perity  &  happiness.  Having  taken  our  final  adieu  1 
observed  honest  Crito  sheding  tears  very  plenti 
fully.  You  seem  to  be  affected,  said  I.  God  bless 
your  honour  said  he,  when  I  think  how  kind  &  gen 
erous  these  poor  Delawans  have  been  to  us,  I  can 
not  help  feeling  an  affection  &  friendship  for  them. 
We  were  obliged  to  anchor  amongst  them,  we  were 
strangers,  &  helpless,  &  they  were  ignorant  Savages, 
yet  they  held  out  the  hand  of  kindness,  &  treated 
us  as  brothers  &  sisters.  Have  they  not  fulfilld  the 
law  of  Christian  charity?  O  that  they  were  good 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  36 

Christians,  may  God  forgive  their  ignorance  A  unbe 
lief,  &  reward  them  for  their  kindness  &  genosity. 
We  passed  on.  No  obsticles  impeded  our  journey 
until  we  came  to  the  great  river  Suscowan,  which 
lif.s,  runs  between  the  Deliwah  River  &  the  great 
moun  mountain.  The  water  being  too  deep  for  ford 
ing,  we  built  a  small  boat,  &  with  this  at  several 
times,  we  conveyed  the  whole  of  the  baggage  & 
company  &  baggage  across,  except  the  managers  of 
the  Mammoons,  who  mounted  them  Afforded  &  swam 
across.  We  then  proceeded  on  by  slow  marches. 
-  -  -  But  in  crossing  the  great  mountain  we  had 
some  difficulties  to  encounter,  but  however  met 
with  received  no  material  damage,  but  finally  arived 
safely  at  the  great  city  Owkahon  on  the  twenty - 
fifth  day  after  our  departure  from  Delawan. 

Fatigued  with  a  long  &  difficult  journey  great  joy 
&  gladness  were  visible  in  every  in_  countanance  <fe 
all  were  disposed  to  establish  our  residence  here, 
until  further  information  could  be  obtained,  &  further 
measures  concerted  to  prosecute  our  journey  to 
Europe.  The  King  &  his  principal  officers  proffered 
us  every  assistance  necessary  to  make  our  situation 
agreeable.  They  assigned  us  in  compliance  with  our 
request  conformity  to  our  desire  a  number  of  houses 
on  the  bank  of  the  river  a  little  distance  from  the 
city.  We  made  him  some  valuable  presents  in  return, 
which  he  received  as  a  token  of  friendship,  but  not  as 
a  compensation.  For  such  was  the  high  sense  of 
honour  which  this  prince  sustained,  that  when  he 
made  a  present  he  would  take  it  as  an  insult  to  offer 
him  anything  as  a  compensation. 


36  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

Having  now  once  more  become  settled  our  little 
community  continued  the  same  regulations  which 
they  had  established  at  Deliwan  &  all  things  pro 
ceeded  in  peace  &  our  affairs  prospered. 

CHAP.  V. 

A  DESCRIPTION   OF  THE   OHONS,  &  MANNER  OF 
PROCURING  A  LIVING. 

I  AM  now  to  describe  a  species  of  nation  who  have 
but  little  resemblance  to  those  to  those  inumerable 
tribes  of  savages,  who  live  along  the  coast  of  the 
Atlantic.  Their  complexion,  the  form  &  construction 
of  their  bodies,  their  customs  manners  laws  govern 
ment  &  religion  all  demonstrate  that  they  must  have 
originated  from  some  other  nation  &  have  but  a  very 
distant  affinity  with  their  savage  neighbors.  As  to 
their  persons  they  were  taller  on  an  average  than  I 
had  ever  seen  in  any  nation,  their  bones  were  large 
limbs  strait  &  shoulders  broad.  Their  eyes  rather 
smalll  &  sunk  deep  in  the  head.  Their  foreheads 
were  prominent  &  the  face  below  tapering  in  such  a 
manner  that  the  chin  that  was  formed  nearly  to  a 
point.  As  to  their  complexion  it  was  bordering  on 
an  olive  tho'  of  a  lighter  shade.  Their  eyes  were 
generally  of  a  dark  brown  or  black.  Their  hair  of 
the  same  color,  tho'  I  have  sometimes  seen  persons, 
whose  hair  was  of  a  redish  hue. 

They  cloathed  themselves  in  choath  which  was 
manufactured  among  themselves  from  the  hair  of  the 
Mammoon  &  from  Cotton,  which  was  transported 
from  the  South  west  westward.  The  men  wore  shoes 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY.1'  87 

<fc  long  stockings  wide  trouses,  a  waistcoat  <t  a  gar 
ment  with  wide  short  sleaves,  which  came  down  to 
their  nees,  &  in  cold  weather  a  cloak  over  the  whole. 
The  covering  for  the  head  was  generaly  a  kind  of 
a  Cap,  which  ran  up  high  &  tapered  to  a  point.  This 
was  generally  made  of  fur  skins  &  was  ornimented 
with  feathers.  It  had  a  small  brim  in  the  shape  of  an 
half  moon  to  project  over  the  forehead.  The  women 
besides  stockings  &  shoes  wore  a  short  petecoat  a  shirt 
of  cotton  a  loose  garment  with  sleaves  which  they 
girted  round  them  with  belts  &  a  cloack.  They  had 
various  orniments  such  as  ribbons  made  from  cotton 
&  coulared  with  different  coulars,  the  most  beautiful 
feathers  that  could  be  obtained  &  shells  of  various 
kinds.  Indeed  the  higher  class  of  women  were 
extremely  fond  of  ornament,  &  wore  placed  a  large 
share  of  their  happiness  in  the  brilliancy  <fe  gaudy 
appearance  of  their  garments.  These  people  obtained 
their  living  generally  by  the  cultivation  of  the  Land,  & 
the  manage  by  tending  &  managing  certain  animals 
which  had  been  so  long  domesticated  that  they  had 
lost  their  wild  nature  &  become  tame.  Corn,  wheat, 
beans,  squashes  &  carrots  they  raised  in  great  abun 
dance.  The  ground  was  plowed  by  horses  &  gen 
erally  made  very  mellow  for  the  reception  of  the 
seed. 

It  was  the  occupation  of  a  certain  part  of  the  men 
to  tend  upon  the  tame  animals,  to  drive  them  to  pas 
ture,  &  keep  them  from  straying,  &  feed  them  when 
the  snow  was  on  the  ground.  Two  men  would  tend 
twenty  Mammouth,  which  were  indifferent  whether 
they  fed  on  grass  or  cropt  the  bushes.  When  these 


38  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

animals  were  fat  their  flesh  was  highly  esteemed. 
They  had  droves  of  Elk,  which  they  had  so  tamed 
&  tutored  that  they  could  manage  them  as  they 
pleased.  These  had  their  tenders  (several  words 

illegible)  &  would  follow  them  like  a  flock  of 
of  sheep.  &  it  was  but  seldom  that  any  would  leave 
their  companions.  The  elk  constituted  a  considera 
ble  portion  of  their  animal  food.  The  horses  were 
managed  in  the  same  way  &  the  people  tho't  their 
meat  to  be  a  savoury  dish.  They  had  large  numbers 
of  turkies  &  gees,  which  tho'  originally  wild,  yet  by 
treating  them  with  great  familiarity  by  croping  their 
wings  &  feeding  them  they  frequently  they  discovered 
no  disposition  to  ramble  off,  but  would  propogated 
their  species  &  laid  eggs  in  abundance. 

Hunting  &  fishing  were  the  employment  of  some 
others  followed  the  mechanical  buciness  &  others  car 
ried  on  a  bartering  trade  to  the  Southwestward  in  order 
to  furnish  to  furnish  the  people  with  cotton  &  other  arti 
cles  whose  production  was  not  congenial  to  their  cli 
mate.  By  pursuing  these  various  employments  they 
generally  had  an  abundance  of  provision  &  were  at 
all  seasons  comfortably  cloathed.  And  here  I  would 
remark  as  one  striking  characteristic  of  this  people, 
that  they  observed  great  neatness  in  their  dress,  in 
their  cookery  &  in  their  houses. 

The  manufacturing  of  lead  Iron  &  lead  was  under 
stood,  but  was  not  carried  on  to  that  extent  &  perfec 
tion  as  in  Europe.  A  small  quantity  of  Iron  in 
proportion  to  the  number  of  Inhabitants  served  to 
supply  them  with  all  the  impliments  which  custom 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY"  39 

had  made  necessary  for  their  use.  By  hammering  & 
hardening  their  Iron  they  would  convert  it  nearly 
into  the  consistence  of  Steal  &  fit  it  for  the  purpose  of 
edged  tools. 

The  potery  business  was  conducted  with  great 
inginuity  &  great  quantities  of  stone  &  earthen  ware 
consisting  of  every  kind  of  vessel  of  every  construc 
tion  which  were  needed  for  family  use,  were  manu 
factured  in  every  part  of  this  extensive  country. 
They  would  These  vessels  they  they  ornimented  with 
pictures  with  the  likenessess  of  various  kinds  of  ani 
mals  &  trees  &  impressed  upon  them  such  coulars  as 
would  strike  the  fancy  with  delight.  The  females  of 
the  high  Class  most  welthy  Class  would  often  have  a 
large  &  superfluous  quantity  of  this  brittle  furniture 
to  decorate  one  apartment  of  the  house.  The  vessels 
they  arranged  in  such  order  as  to  make  a  display 
of  taste  &  impress  the  mind  with  the  agreeable  sensa 
tion  of  beauty. 

In  Architecture  there  can  be  no  comparison  with 
the  civilized  nations  of  Europe.  In  their  most  welthy 
and  populous  Cities  they  their  houses  &  public  build 
ings  exhibit  no  eligance,  no  appearance  of  wealth  or 
grandure,  all  is  plain  <fc  nothing  superfluous.  But 
convenience  seems  to  be  the  whole  object  they  had  in 
view  in  the  construction  of  their  buildings  of  every 
kind. 

Their  houses  were  generally  but  one  story  high 
built  of  wood,  being  framed  &  covered  with  split 
clapboards  or  shingles,  &  in  the  inside  the  walls  were 
formed  of  clay,  which  was  plastered  over  with  a  thin 


40  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

coat  of  lime.  Their  houses  seldom  consisted  of  more 
than  three  apartments.  As  to  their  chimneys  they 
built  construct  a  wall  of  stone  about  five  feet  hight 
for  the  fire  to  be  against  which  they  build  their  fire, 
from  the  top  of  this  wall  they  construct  the  chimney 
with  thin  pieces  of  split  timber,  on  the  inside  with  wet 
dirt  or  clay  of  which  they  plaister  wet  dirt  or  clay 
which  compleatly  covers  &  adheres  to  the  timber  & 
prevents  the  fire  from  having  any  operation  upon  it. 
The  inside  of  their  houses  as  the  women  generally 
practise  neatness,  makes  a  much  better  appearance 
than  the  outside. 

It  is  my  opinion  says  Trojanus  that  this  people  dis 
play  a  taste  in  building  which  is  formed  upon  the 
true  principles  of  Reason.  Their  houses  are  suffi 
ciently  spacious  for  convenience.  No  expense  or 
Labour  are  thrown  away  in  building  useless  apart 
ments  or  in  erecting  their  houses  higher  than  what 
convenience  requires.  The  whole  catalogue  of  orna 
mental  trumpery  is  neglected.  This  in  Rome  pro 
duces  more  than  half  the  Labour  &  expense  in 
building.  Yes  says  Lucian,  and  without  this  these 
labouring  people  must  starve  for  want  of  employ- 
ment,  &  the  citizens  of  the  Roman  empire  would  be 
deprived  of  the  honour  of  possessing  a  splendid  Capital 
&  of  the  exquisite  pleasure  of  beholding  the  greatest 
exhibition  of  human  ingenuity  in  the  elegance  the 
splendour  the  purity  &  beauty  of  their  houses,  their 
palaces  &  their  public  edifices.  True  indeed,  replies 
Trojanus,  men  may  be  dazed  &  delighted  with  such 
objects  for  the  moment,  But  could  not  wealth  be  bet- 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  41 

ter  bestowed  upon  to  promote  interest  of  the  com 
munity  A  for  charitable  purposes  <fe  these  artists 
tn-tter  employ  their  strength  A  ingenuity  in  producing 
some  substantial  benefits  to  themselves  A  others? 
Rejoins  Lucian,  the  course  reason  dictates  is  to  avoid 
extremes.  A  slab  coulared  world  would,  tire  the 
senses  by  its  uniformity  A  too  much  orniment  A 
splendor,  would  cease  to  please  by  its  frequency. 

Besides,  lofty  houses  can  be  more  easily  over 
thrown  by  tornadoes  or  tumbled  down  upon  our 
heads  by  earthquakes.  The  course,  says  Lucian 
that  reason  dictates  is  to  avoid  extremes.  A  slab 
coulored  world  by  its  uniformity  would  tire  the 
senses,  A  by  its  possessing  too  much  ornament  A 
splendor  it  would  cease  to  please.  (But  the  wonder 
wont  cease  when  it  is  considered  that  mankind  with 
but  few  exceptions  to  walk  in  the  tracks  of  their 
fathers  A  to  pursue  the  road  marked  out  by  their 
education.) 

CHAP.  VI. 

DESCRIPTION   OF  THE    LEARNING,   RELIGION    &    CUSTOMS 
OF    THE   OHONS. 

LEARNING  appears  to  be  so  important  to  the  nature 
of  man  A  a  good  convenient  share  of  it  so  easy  to 
obtain,  that  some  may  wonder  why  it  is  not  univer 
sally  diffused  thro*  the  world.  But  If  we  can  place 
any  reliance  on  the  dark  annals  of  antient  history,  it 
is  certain  that  letters  are  indebted  for  their  existence 
to  the  inventive  genius  of  certain  extraordinary  char- 


42  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

acters.  Egypt  &  Chaldea  contended  for  the  honour 
of  being  the  first  who  invented  letters.  Perhaps  they 
were  invented  in  each  nation  nearly  at  the  same  time. 
But  let  this  be  as  it  may  could  no  other  nation  in  the 
world  produce  as  great  geniuses  as  Egypt  or 
Chaldea?*  Is  there  any  natural  obsticle  to  prevent 
their  production  in  America  as  well  as  in  Asia? 
Whatever  may  be  the  reasoning  of  some  on  this  sub 
ject,  the  fact  is  that  I  found  Letters  or  some  share  of 
learning,  tho'  in  a  very  imperfect  state  among  this 
people.  At  present  I  shall  wave  the  account  of  its 
introduction  &  shall  merely  describe  the  state  of 
learning  as  it  existed  among  the  Ohons.  They  had 
characters  which  represent  words  &  all  compound 
words  were  had  each  part  represented  by  its  appro 
priate  character.  The  variation  of  cases,  moods  & 
tenses  was  designated  by  certain  marks  placed  under 
the  characters.  They  generally  wrote  on  parchment 
&  beginning  at  the  right  wrote  from  the  top  to  the  bot 
tom,  placing  each  character  directly  under  the  pro 
ceeding  one  &  having  finished  one  column  or  line  they 
begin  the  write  the  next  on  the  left  of  that  &  so  con 
tinue  on  until  they  cover  the  parchment  if  the  subject 
requires  it.  It  is  a  work  of  considerable  labour  <fc 
time  to  obtain  such  a  knowledge  of  their  characters  & 
the  application  as  to  be  able  to  read  with  fluencey  &  to 
write  with  ease  &  accuracy. 

In   the   principal   Cities  &  towns  the   government 
appointed  learned  men  to  instruct  the  sons  of  the 


*  Note.    The  most  probable  conjecture  is  that  they  were  communicated  from 
one  nation  to  the  other. 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY.11  43 

higher  class  of  Citizens  <fc  in  the  course  of  four  or  five 
years  they  will  make  such  proficiency  as  to  become 
tolerable  schollars. 

The  works  of  the  learned  are  not  very  voluminous. 
Records  are  kept  of  the  transactions  of  their  govern 
ment.  Their  constitution  &  laws  are  committed  to 
writing.  A  sacred  Roll  in  manuscript  is  preserved 
among  the  Records  of  tln-ir  Kmporors  <fe  kings.  <fc  are 
dispersed  thro*  the  Empire  <fe  much  pains  taken  to 
diffuse  the  knowledge  of  them  among  the  people.  In 
all  their  large  towns  &  Cities  they  have  deposited 
under  the  care  of  a  priest  a  sacred  Roll  which  con 
tains  the  tenets  of  their  Theology  &  a  description  of 
their  religious  ceremonies.  This  order  of  men  pub 
lish  comments  upon  these  sacred  writings.  They 
publish  some  tracts  on  moral  philosophy  &  some  con 
taining  a  collection  of  proverbs  &  the  wise  sayings 
of  their  sages. 

But  the  kind  of  composition  in  which  they  most 
exult  is  poetry.  In  poetic  numbers  they  describe 
the  great  events  which  take  place  &  the  exploits  & 
mighty  achievements  of  their  heroes.  In  soft  elegies 
they  describe  paint  the  Amours  of  Lovers  &  in 
pathetic  strains  they  delineate  the  calamities  of  sor 
row  of  the  unfortunate. 

In  their  assemblies  it  is  very  common  for  a  certain 
class  of  these  learned  poets  to  entertain  the  company 
(-  -  -  line  gone  -  -  -  -)  with  a  resital  of  poetic 
pieces  describing  the  baties  <fc  exploits  of  their  war 
riors,  or  to  sing  some  arnourous  or  witty  ballad.  As 
for  theators  they  have  none,  but  as  a  kind  of  sussti- 
tute  there  are  actors  who  entertain  the  people  by 


44  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

pronounsing  dialogues  or  plays  in  which  they  display 
all  the  arts  of  mimicry  &  act  out  the  express  in  their 
countanance  their  gesture  &  the  tone  of  their  voices 
the  different  passions  of  the  human  mind.  As  only 
a  small  portion  of  the  people  are  instructed  in  the 
arts  of  reading  &  writing,  of  consequence  the  great 
mass  must  possess  a  large  share  of  ignorance,  but 
not  so  great  a  share  as  savages  who  have  no  learn 
ing  among  them.  They  hear  the  conversation  &  the 
lectures  of  their  sages,  they  are  entertained  with  Their 
poetic  orators  entertain  them  with  the  productions 
of  their  poets,  containing  the  history  of  great  events 
&  mighty  athievements.  Their  actors  divert  &  please 
them  by  exciting  the  various  passions  at  the  same 
time  communicating  instruction  &  correcting  the  nat 
ural  savageness  of  manner  by  &  as  the  pieces  they 
rehearse  contain  many  ideas  &  sentiments  tending  to 
expose  the  deformity  of  vice  &  the  folly  of  supersti 
tion  &  the  disgustingness  of  rude  &  clownish  man 
ners,  the  people  are  of  consequence  improved  & 
considerably  refined  &  add  to  their  living  in  compact 
towns  or  considerable  cities  in  which  there  is  a  con 
stant  &  reciprocal  communication  of  ideas,  which  of 
course  would  have  no  small  effect  to  inform  their 
minds.  To  all  these  causes  combined  the  Ohons  the 
great  mass  of  the  people  are  indebted  for  possessing 
a  considerable  share  of  knowledge  &  civilization. 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  45 


RELION  VH. 

IN  every  nation  there  is  some  kind  of  Religion  &  in 
every  religion,  however  adulterated  &  corrupted,  there 
are  some  things  which  are*  commendable,  some 
things  which  serve  to  improve  the  morals  &  influence 
mankind  to  conduct  better  than  what  they  would  do 
provided  they  pursued  the  natural  dictates  of  their 
depraved  mind,  without  any  restraint  As  this  senti 
ment  is  an  established  maxim  which  has  been  believed 
in  every  nation  from  the  earliest  ages  in  every  nation, 
hense  it  has  been  the  policy  of  all  governments  to 
encourage  &  protect  some  kind  of  religion.  In  exam 
ining  the  religious  systems,  sentiments  <fc  precepts 
which  are  believed  &  practised  throughout  this  exten 
sive  Empire,  &  which  are  encouraged  &  protected  by 
the  government.  I  found  some  things  which  are 
common  to  the  various  systems  of  theology  in  Europe 
&  Asia,  &  some  things  which  have  no  resemblance  to 
either  From  the  sacred  Roll  as  it  is  denominated  I 
shall  extract  the  tenets  of  their  theology  &  a  descrip 
tion  of  their  religious  ceremonies.  It  expresses  them 
them  to  this  effect 

"There  is  an  intelligent  omnipotent  Being  who  is 
self-existent  <fc  infinitely  good  <fc  benevolent.  Matter 
eternally  existed.  He  put  forth  his  hand  &  formed  it 
into  such  bodies  as  he  pleased.  He  presides  over  the 
universe  <fc  has  a  perfect  knowledge  of  all  things. 
From  his  own  spiritual  substance  he  formed  seven 
sons.  These  are  his  principal  agents  to  manage  the 


46  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

affairs  of  his  empire.  He  formed  the  bodies  of  men 
from  matter.  Into  each  body  he  emitted  infussed  a 
particle  of  his  own  spiritual  substance,  in  conse 
quence  of  which  man  in  his  first  formation  was 
inclined  to  benevolence  &  goodness.  There  is  also 
another  great  intelligent  Being  who  is  self -existent  & 
possessed  of  great  power  but  not  of  Omnipotence. 
He  is  filled  with  infinite  malice  against  the  good 
Being  &  exerts  all  his  subtlety  &  power  to  ruin  his 
works.  Seing  the  happy  situation  of  man  he 
approached  so  near  as  to  tuch  his  soul  with  his 
deliterious  -hand.  The  poison  was  immediately  dif 
fused  &  contaminated  his  passions  &  appetites.  His 
reason  &  understanding  received  no  injury.  The 
good  being  looking  upon  his  unhappy  offspring  with 
infinite  love  &  compassion,  made  a  decree  that  if 
mankind  would  reduce  their  passions  &  appetites 
under  the  government  of  reason,  he  should  be  enjoy 
blessings  in  this  world,  &  be  compleatly  happy  after 
death  his  soul  quits  his  body.  Death  dissolves  the 
connection.  Material  Bodies  are  prepared  for  the 
souls  of  the  righteous.  These  bodies  can  pass  thro' 
any  part  of  the  universe  &  are  invisible  to  mortal 
eyes.  Their  place  of  residence  is  on  a  great  &  city 
vast  plain,  which  is  beautiful  with  magnificent  build 
ings,  with  Trees  fruits  &  flowers.  Here  they  enjoy 
every  delight  which  No  imagination  can  paint  the 
delights  the  felicity  of  the  Righteous.  But  the 
wicked  have  no  etherial  are  denied  etherial  bodies. 
Their  souls  naked  &  incapable  of  seeing  light  dwel  in 
darkness  &  are  tormented  with  the  keenest  anguish. 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  47 

Ages  roll  away  A  the  good  Being  has  compassion 
upon  them.  He  permits  them  to  take  possession  of 
etherial  bodies  &  they  arise  quick  to  the  abodes  of 
delight  &  glory.  Now,  O  man,  attend  to  thy  duty  <fc 
thou  shalt  escape  the  portion  of  the  wicked.  <fc  enjoy 
all  the  delights  of  the  righteous.  Avoid  all  acts  of 
cruelty  to  man  &  beast.* 

defraud  not  thy  neighbours  nor  suffer  thy  hands 
secretly  to  convey  his  property  from  him.  Preserve 
thy  body  from  the  contamination  of  lust,  <fe  remember 
that  the  seduction  of  thy  neighbours  wife  would  be  a 
great  Crime.  Let  thy  citizens  be  numbered  once  in 
two  years,  A  if  the  young  women  who  are  fit  for  mar- 
riage  are  more  numerous  than  the  young  men,  then 
wealthy  men  who  are  young  <fc  who  have  but  one  wife 
shall  have  the  privilege  with  the  permission  of  the 
king  to  marry  another  until  the  number  of  the  single 
young  women  A  the  single  young  men  are  made 
equal.  But  he  who  hath  two  wives  shall  have  a 
house  provided  for  each  &  he  shall  spend  his  time 
equally  with  each  one. 

Be  grateful  for  all  favours  A  forsake  not  thy  friend 
in  adversity.  Treat  with  kindness  &  reverence  thy 
Parents.  Forsake  them  not  in  old  age  nor  let  their 
cheek  be  furrowed  with  tears  for  the  want  of  bread. 
Bow  down  thy  head  before  the  aged,  treat  thy  superi 
ors  with  respect,  &  place  thy  rulers  &  thy  teachers  in 
the  most  honourable  seats.  Let  Rulers  consult  the 
welfare  of  the  people  &  not  agrandize  themselves  by 

*No  crime  Is  BO  horrid  as  maliciously  to  destroy  the  life  of  man. 


48  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

oppression  &  base  bribes.  Let  Religious  Teachers 
walk  in  the  road  which  leads  to  celestial  happiness  & 
lead  the  people  after  them.  Let  Parents  restrain  the 
vices  of  their  children  &  instruct  their  minds  in  useful 
knowledge.  Contention  &  Strife  is  is  the  Bane  of 
Families  &  the  destruction  of  domestick  happiness, 
being  yoked  together  the  husband  &  wife  ought  to 
draw  in  the  same  direction.  Their  countanances  will 
then  appear  beautiful  shine  with  the  effulgent  Beams 
of  Friendship  &  love,  peace  &  harmony  will  attend 
their  habitation  &  their  affairs  will  prosper. 

Hold  out  the  hand  of  kindness  &  friendship  to 
thy  neighbour,  consider  him  when  reduced  to  indigence 
&  distress,  He  is  as  dear  to  the  great  &  good  being  a-s 
what  thou  art.  &  thou  now  hast  an  opportunity  to 
manifest  the  disposition  of  thy  heart  To  afford  him 
relief  will  be  pleasing  to  thy  Maker  &  an  expression 
of  thy  gratituge. 

Envious  &  malicious  Souls  are  almost  incurably 
contaminated  with  that  hellish  poison  which  which 
was  first  disordered  the  soul  of  man.  Partake  not  of 
their  guilt  by  joining  them  in  the  malignant  work  of 
slander  &  detraction.  Their  intended  mischief  returns 
upon  their  own  heads,  &  the  slandered  character  of 
the  innocent  &  just  shines  forth  with  increasing  lus 
tre.  Let  the  stranger  find  an  hospitable  resting 
place  under  thy  roof.  Give  him  to  eat  from  thy  por 
tion  that  when  he  departs  he  may  bless  thee  &  go  on 
his  way  rejoicing. 

Industry  will  Say  not  to  thyself  I  will  indulge 
inactivity  &  idleness  &  lie  upon  the  bed  of  sloth  & 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  .  49 

slumber  away  the  precious  moments  of  time,  for  in 
this  thou  art  unwise,  for  unwise  disease  will  attend 
thee,  hunger  will  torment  thee  &  Rags  will  be  thy 
clothing.  Let  industry  &  economy  fill  up  the  meas 
ure  of  thy  waking  moments.  So  shall  thy  counta- 
nance  display  health  &  sprightliness,  plenty  shall 
supply  the  wants  of  thy  family  &  thy  reputation  shall 
be  respectable. 

But  behold  a  being  in  human  form  from  whom  I 
turn  away  in  disgust  &  abhorrence.  He  is  covered 
with  so  much  dirt  &  filth  that  no  etherial  body  is 
provided  for  him  nor  can  he  be  received  into  the 
abodes  of  the  blessed.  Suffer  not  thy  bodies  or  thy 
garments  to  remain  long  besmeared  with  dirt  &  filth. 
Cleanliness  prevents  many  diseases  <fc  is  pleasant  to 
the  sight.  But  from  a  dirty  filthy  mortal  we  turn 
with  disgust  &  abhorrance.  As  the  great  Author  of 
our  existence  being  is  benevolent  to  all  his  offspring, 
so  it  becomes  us  to  be  benevolent  to  our  fellow  beings 
around  us.  Oou  Country  is  one  body  &  we  are  part 
of  its  members.  We  are  therefore  bound  to  maintain 
their  rights  &  priviledges  &  the  the  honour  &  dignity 
of  our  Country  at  the  risk  of  our  lives.  Great 
rewards  attend  the  brave  &  their  exploits  &  achieve 
ments  in  contending  against  tyrants  &  in  defending 
the  Rights  their  of  their  Country  will  be  celebrated  on 
the  plains.  But  the  vision  now  expands  &  directs 
our  contemplation  to  fix  on  his  attributes,  whose 
spiritual  substance  is  commensurate  with  infinity. 
As  only  a  single  particle  from  his  substance  consti 
tutes  our  souls,  how  small  how  diminutive  must  we 


50  m  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

appear  in  the  view  of  Omniscience.  We  must  there 
fore  contemplate  his  attributes  thro*  the  medium  of 
his  works,  &  admire  with  profound  reverance  & 
adoration  his  wisdom  goodness  &  power  which  are 
visible  in  the  formation  &  arrangement  of  all  material 
bodies  &  spiritual  beings.  He  requires  us  to  supli- 
cate  his  favours,  &  when  received  to  express  our 
gratitude.  As  our  passions  &  appetites  often  get  the 
assendence  of  our  reason,  we  are  therefore  bound  to 
confess  our  faults  &  implore  forgiveness. 

Now  that  you  may  know  and  keep  all  these  thing 
which  were  made  known  by  divine  inspiration,  it  is 
ordained  that  on  every  eighth  day,  ye  lay  aside  all 
unnecessary  labour,  that  ye  meet  in  convenient 
numbers  &  form  assemblies,  that  at  each  assembly 
a  learned  holy  man  shall  preside,  who  shall  lead  your 
devotions  &  explain  this  sacred  Roll  &  give  you  such 
instruction  as  shall  promote  your  happiness  in  this 
life  &  in  the  life  to  come.  Once  in  three  months  ye 
shall  hold  a  great  festival  in  every  great  city  &  town, 
&  your  priests  shall  sacrifice  an  Elk  as  a  token  that 
your  sins  deserve  punishment,  but  that  the  divine 
mercy  hath  banished  them  into  shades  of  forgetful- 
ness. 

Be  attentive  oh  man,  to  the  words  of  truth  which 
have  been  recorded  &  &  respect  to  all  the  command 
ments  which  have  been  written  for  your  observance. 
Your  Maker  will  then  be  rejoiced  to  see  you  rejoice 
in  the  participation  of  his  favour  &  to  behold  your 
faces  brighten  with  the  cheering  benign  beams  of 
cheerfulness. 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  51 

AN  ACCOUNT   OF  BASKA   CHAP  VIII 

AMONG  the  great  A  illustrious  characters  who  have 
appeared  in  the  world  in  different  ages  as  instructors 
&  reformers  of  mankind,  Baska  holds  is  entitled  to  a 
conspicuous  place. 

The  place  of  his  nativity  is  not  recorded.  But  the 
first  notice  which  is  given  of  him  is  his  appearing  at  the 
great  City  of  Golanga,  which  is  situate  on  the  Banks 
of  the  Siota  River.  He  was  attended  by  his  wife  & 
two  little  sons.  The  fashion  of  their  garments  were 
different  from  the  natives.  Their  complexion  like 
wise  was  of  a  little  whiter.  They  were  Baska  was 
grave  solemn  &  sedate  reserved  in  his  conversation, 
but  when  he  spoke  wisdom  proceeded  from  his  lips. 
His  fame  spread  rapidly  thro'  the  city  &  country,  & 
he  was  celebrated  as  a  man  of  the  most  brilliant  & 
extraordinary  talents.  He  was  conducted  to  the  King 
&  introduced  to  him.  The  King  asked  him  from 
what  country  he  came.  His  reply  was,  at  a  great 
distance  from  the  westward.  He  then  asked  him 
induced  him  to  come  into  his  country.  He  replied 


CHAPT  VHI 

PERHAPS  reader,  before  we  describe  the  government 
of  the  Ohons  it  might  be  proper  to  relax  our  mind  by 
with  a  few  seeches  of  Biography.  The  character 
which  will  best  connect  with  the  history  of  the  learn 
ing  &  religion  &  the  government^:  laws  of  the  Ohons 
is  that  of  the  great  and  illustrious  Lobaska. 


52  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

He  is  the  man  who  first  introduced  their  present 
method  of  writing  who  presented  them  with  the 
sacred  Roll  which  contains  the  tenets  &  precepts  of 
their  religion,  &  who  formed  their  political  constitu 
tion  as  it  respects  the  connection  of  various  kingdoms 
or  tribes  under  one  government. 

There  are  many  anecdotes  which  tradition  has 
handed  down  respecting  this  extraordinary  man, 
which  have  the  complexion  of  fables  the  miraculous  & 
hence  I  conclude  they  must  be  fabulous  Such  as  his 
As  for  instance  he  is  represented  as  forming  a  curious 
machine  by  which  &  having  placed  himself  upon  it  he 
mounted  into  the  Atmosphere  &  assended  a  great 
hight  &  having  sailed  a  considerable  time  distance 
thro'  the  air  he  desended  slowly  &  received  no 
damage  &  that  multitudes  of  astonished  Spectators 
had  a  number  of  times  seen  him  perform  this  miracu 
lous  exploit,  &  that  he  declared  that  when  he  took 
these  excursions,  his  extraordinary  wisdom  &  knowl 
edge  was  communicated  to  him.  If  he  did  in  fact 
perform  such  exploits  no  wonder  that  he  managed  an 
ignorant  people  as  he  pleased.  But  as  it  is  not  my 
intention  to  amuse  my  readers  by  a  splendid  relation 
of  fables,  I  shall  confine  myself  to  facts  which  can 
not  be  contested.  The  place  of  his  nativity  is  not 
recorded.  The  first  account  given  of  him  was  his 
appearance  in  the  great  City  of  Golanga  which  is 
situate  on  the  Banks  of  the  Siota  River.  When  he 
entered  that  city  he  was  attended  by  his  wife  &  four 
sons  the  the  eldest  of  whom  was  about  eighteen  years 
of  age.  He  himself  appeared  to  be  about  forty.  His 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  68 

personal  appearance  was  commanding  being  of  mid- 
ling  Stature  of  a  bold  frank  countanance  &  eyes  lively 
&  penetrating.  In  his  general  deportment  he  was 
cheerful  yet  displayed  much  sedateness  &  gravity. 
He  was  affable  &  familiar  in  conversation  but  not 
loquacious,  he  never  would  converse  long  on  trifling 
subjects,  had  a  wonderful  faculty  to  intermix  some 
wise  sayings  <fc  remarks  that  should  improve  &  of 
turning  with  dignity  and  gravefulness  the  attention 
of  the  company  to  subjects  that  were  important  & 
interesting.  None  could  then  withstand  the  energy 
of  his  reasoning,  &  all  were  astonished  at  the  inge 
nuity  of  his  arguments  &  the  great  knowledge  & 
wisdom  which  he  displayed.  His  fame  spread  thro* 
the  City  Ajnulti  <fc  country  A  multitudes  frequently 
assembled  &  importuned  him  to  give  them  instruction. 
Always  cheerful  to  gratify  the  curiosity  &  comply 
with  the  reasonable  requests  of  the  multitude,  he 
entertained  them  by  conversing  with  them  familiarly, 
&  by  exhibiting  public  discourses.  All  were  charmed 
with  his  wisdom  &  eloquence,  and  all  united  in  pro 
nouncing  him  to  be  the  most  extraordinary  man  in 
existence,  &  generally  believed  that  he  had  conver 
sation  with  the  celestial  beings,  &  always  acted  under 
the  influence  of  divine  inspiration.  The  people  were 
very  liberal  in  their  donations,  which  enabled  him  to 
support  his  family  in  affluence.  Having  thus  in  a 
short  time  established  a  character  with  respect  to 
wisdom  &  eloquence  to  any  man  who  had  ever 
appeared  before  him  in  the  nation,  he  then  at  an 
enterview  which  he  held  with  the  king  &  the  chiefs 
told  them  that  he  had  invented  the  art  of  expressing 


B4  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

ideas  by  certain  marks  or  characters,  &  having 
explained  the  nature  of  the  subject  to  their  full  satis 
faction,  he  then  proposed  to  establish  a  school  for  the 
instruction  of  the  sons  of  the  principal  subjects  of  the 
King.  This  proposal  was  received  &  accepted  with 
much  gratitude  &  cheerfulness.  A  house  was  imme 
diately  prepared  for  the  accommodation  of  Schollars, 
&  in  a  short  time  the  number  amounted  to  nearly  two 
hundred.  But  here  it  must  be  observed  that  the  art 
of  making  &  applying  the  characters  to  the  words 
which  they  represented,  was  taught  principally  by 
his  sons.  They  had  all  received  an  education  from 
their  father  &  even  the  youngest  who  was  but  eleven 
years  old  could  read  &  write  with  great  correctness. 
&  facility.  He  superintended  their  instruction  &  very 
frequently  gave  them  lectures  on  scientific  &  moral 
subjects,  his  schollars  made  great  progress  in  learn 
ing  &  delighted  their  parents  with  the  improvement 
they  had  made  in  literature  civilization  &  refinement. 
He  still  continued  to  associate  among  the  people,  & 
was  indefatigable  in  his  labours  to  dispel  their  igno 
rance,  correct  their  superstition  &  vices  &  to  diffuse  a 
more  accurate  knowledge  of  the  mechanical  arts. 
The  manufacture  of  Iron  in  particular  was  not  known. 
This  he  taught  a  number  by  showing  them  how  to 
build  a  small  furnace,  &  to  cast  iron  ware,  &  then  to 
build  a  small  forge  &  there  refine  pigs,  &  convert 
them  into  Iron. 

He  had  resided  among  the  Siotans  about  three 
years,  &  the  happy  effects  of  his  labours  were  visible 
to  all  observers.  A  great  reformation  had  taken 
place  in  the  morals  &  manners  of  the  people,  Industry 


THE  ''MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  66 

had  encreased,_&  agriculture  A  the  mechanical  arts 
had  received  great  improvement  &  houses  were  built 
on  a  more  commodious  &  eligant  construction.  But 
not  willing  to  stop  here  the  benevolent  mind  of  the 
great  Tobaska  meditated  a  more  important  revolu 
tion.  Now  was  the  propitious  era_to  had  arived  &  the 
way  was  prepared  for  the  introduction  of  that  system 
of  Theology,  which  is  comprized  in  the  sacred  Roll. 

In  the  first  place  he  read  &  explained  the  whole 
system  to  the  King  &  the  chiefs  of  the  nation,  who 
cordially  gave  it  their  approbation  &  gave  permission 
to  propogate  it  among  the  people.  Under  the  pre 
tense  that  this  system  was  revealed  to  him  in  several 
enterviews,  which  he  had  been  permitted  to  have  with 
the  second  son  of  the  great  <fc  good  Being,  the  people 
did  not  long  hesitate  but  received  as  sacred  & 
divine  truth  every  word  which  he  taught  them.  They 
forgot  their  old  religion  which  was  a  confused  & 
absurd  medly  of  Idolitry  &  superstitious  nonsense  & 
embraced  a  religion  more  sublime  &  consistent, 
db  more  fraught  with  sentiments  which  would  pro 
mote  the  happiness  of  mankind  in  this  world. 

Whilst  the  Siotans  were  thus  rapidly  progressing 
in  their  improvements  they  were  unhappily  disturbed 
by  the  certain  prospect  of  war.  Bombal,  the  King 
of  the  Kentucks,  a  nation  that  lived  on  the  south  side 
of  the  great  River  Ohio,  had  taken  great  umbrage 
against  Kadokam  the  King  of  Siota.  This  Bombal 
was  the  most  haughty  &  the  jnost  powerful  prince 
who  reigned  in  this  part  of  the  western  Continent.  It 
had  been  the  custom  for  several  ages  for  the  King 


56  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

&  chiefs  of  the  Kentucks  to  have  the  exclusive 
right  to  wear  in  their  caps  a  bunch  of  blue  feathers, 
which  designated  their  preeminence  over  every 
nation.  The  Siotan  princes  envying  them  this  dis 
tinguished  honor  &  considering  themselves  as  being 
at  least  their  equals  assumed  the  liberty  to  place 
bunches  of  Blue  feathers  upon  their  caps.  This  in 
the  opinion  of  the  Kentucks  was  an  unpardonable 
offense  if  persisted  in,  &  a  most  daring  insult  upon 
their  supreme  dignity.  A  messenger  was  immedi 
After  a  solemn  Council  was  held  with  his  chiefs 
Bombal,  with  their  unanimous  consent  dispatched  a 
messenger  to  Kadocam,  who  thus  proclaimed. 

Thus  saith  Bombal,  the  king  of  kings  &  the  most 
mighty  prince  on  earth.  Ye  have  insulted  my  our 
honour  &  dignity,  in  assuming  blue  feathers  which 
was  the  badge  of  our  preeminence.  Know  ye  that 
uless  you  tear  them  from  your  caps  ye  shall  feel  the 
weight  of  our  ven-gence. 

Kadocam  replied.  Tell  your  master  that  a  great 
Company  of  Wolves  made  an  attack  upon  a  City,  to 
rob  the  citizens  of  their  dear  &  elk,  &  they  let  forth 
their  dogs  upon  them,  which  attacked  them  with  such 
fury,  &  courage  that  they  fled  mangled  &  torn  to  a 
most  dreary  swamp.  Here  they  by  the  most  tremen- 
dous  the  most  plaintive  howling,  they  lamented  their 
sad  disaster  &  disgrace. 

An  answer  so  shrewd  &  insulting  it  was  expected 
would  soon  be  followed  by  an  invasion.  Measures 
must  immediately  be  taken  for  the  defense  of  the 
kingdom.  Lobaska  was  invited  to  set  in  council.  All 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  .57 

were  unanimously  of  opinion  that  to  comply  with  the 
haughty  demand  of  Bombal,  by  tearing  the  Blue 
feathers  from  their  caps  would  be  degrading  the 
honour  of  the  nation  &  a  relinquishment  of  their 
natural  right,  that  they  were  likewise  sensible  that 
the  most  vigorous  exertions  were  necessary  to  save 
the  country  from  ruin.  The  opinion  &  advice  -of 
Lobaska  was  requested.  It  is  my  opinion  says  he 
that  by  using  a  little  stratigem,  this  war  might  be 
bro't  to  a  conclusion,  which  will  be  honourable  to  this 
kingdom.  We  will  pursue,  says  the  King  your 
advice  &  directions.  I  shall  be  happy  says  Lobaska 
to  assist  you  with  my  best  advice.  Call  immediately 
into  the  field  an  army  of  three  Thousand  men,  pro 
vide  two  thousand  shovels  five  hundred  mathooks  & 
five  hundred  wheelbarrows,  &  one  hundred  axes.  I 
will  give  directions  how  to  make  them.  Not  a 
moment  was  lost.  The  army  was  assembled,  &  impli- 
ments  provided  with  the  utmost  expidition.  &  they 
marched  down  the  river,  to  a  certain  place  where  the 
Army  of  the  Enimy  must  pass  in  order  to  arrive  at 
the  city  of  Golanga.  At  this  place  the  hills  or  moun 
tains  came  within  less  than  a  mile  of  the  river,  &  a 
flat  or  level  land  intervened.  Here  Lobaska  directed 
that  a  canal  should  be  cut  from  the  River  to  the  River 
to  the  Hill  That  it  should  be  eight  feet  wide  &  eight 
deep  &  that  the  dirt  which  they  dug  should  be  thrown 
into  the  river.  That  the  canal  except  what  should  be 
wanted  to  lay  over  thin  pieces  of  split  timber,  which 
should  be  extended  over  the  canal  so  weak  &  slender 
that  the  weight  of  a  man  would  break  them  down. 
This  novel  invention  invention  was  soon  carried  into 


58  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY.1' 

effect  &  the  work  compleatly  finished.  Every  pre 
caution  was  used  to  prevent  any  intelligence  of  these 
transactions  from  getting  to  the  enimy. 

In  the  meantime  Kadokam  bro't  into  the  field  seven 
thousand  more  of  his  warriors,  men  of  brave  hearts  & 
valiant  for  the  battle.  The  indignant  king  of  the  Ken- 
tucks  had  by  this  time  assembled  an  army  of  Thirty 
Thousand  men,  who  were  ready  at  the  risk  of  their 
lives  to  vindicate  the  preeminence  of  their  nation. 
&  the  transendent  dignity  of  their  King  &  his  chiefs. 
Had  of  this  At  the  head  of  this  army  Bombal  began 
his  march  to  execute  his  threatened  vengance  on  the 
Siotans.  As  he  entered  their  country  he  found  the 
viliges  deserted,  &  all  the  movable  property  con 
veyed  away,  not  a  man  or  worn  was  to  be  seen  until 
he  came  in  view  of  the  army  of  Kadokam,  who 
was  encamped  within  a  small  distance  of  the  Canal. 
Bombal  halted  &  formed  his  men  in  two  Ranks, 
extending  from  the  River  to  the  Hill.  He  had  a 
reserved  core,  who  were  placed  in  the  rear  of  the  main 
body,  Having  thus  arranged  them  for  battle  he  went 
from  one  wing  to  the  other,  proclaiming  alould,  we 
have  been  insulted,  brave  Soldiers,  by  these  cow 
ardly  Siotans.  They  have  assumed  the  blue  Feather 
the  badge  of  our  preeminance  &  exalted  dignity. 
Behold  it  flying  in  their  Caps.  Will  your  highborn 
souls  submit  to  behold  such  Dastards  place  them 
selves  on  equal  terms  with  you?  No,  my  valiant 
warriors,  let  us  revenge  the  insult  by  the  destruc 
tion  of  their  puny  army,  &  the  conflagration  of  their 
city.  Make  a  furious  charge  upon  them  &  &  the 
victory  is  ours.  Let  your  motto  be  blue  Feather  & 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  59 

you  will  fight  like  wolves  robbed  of  their  puppies. 
Hadokam  had  by  this  time  formed  his  army  in 
order  of  Battle  close  to  the  edge  of  the  canal  & 
extended  them  in  one  rank  only  from  the  River  to 
the  Hill.  As  the  Kentucks  approached  within  a 
small  distance,  the  Siotans  gave  back  &  began  a 
retreat  with  apparent  confusion,  notwithstanding  the 
pretended  efforts  of  the  King  &  his  officers  to  pre 
vent  their  retreating.  Bombal,  observing  this  com 
manded  to  rush  forward  on  the  full  run,  but  to  keep 
their  ranks  in  order.  This  they  instantly  obeyed 
as  one  man,  <fc  as  soon  as  their  feet  stept  on  the 
slender  covering  of  the  canal  it  gave  way  &  they 
fell  to  the  bottom,  some  in  one  position  &  some  in 
another.  A  disaster  so  novel  &  unexpected  might 
have  appalled  the  stoutest  &  filled  their  minds  with 
amazement  &  terror.  Nor  did  this  compleat  their 
misfortune  of  the  army  of  Bombal.  An  ambush  of 
the  Siotans,  who  lay  on  the  side  of  the  hill  opposite 
to  the  reserved  Corps  of  the  Kentucks,  rushed  down 
upon  them  in  an  instant.  Surprize  &  terror  pre 
vented  resistance,  they  threw  down  their  arms  & 
surrendered.  The  retreating  army  of  Hadocam 
immediately  returned  with  shouting  to  the  edge  of 
the  Canal.  Their  enimies,  who  but  a  moment  before 
thot  themselves  invincible  &  certain  of  victory,  were 
now  defenceless  &  wholly  in  their  power.  When 
Lobaska  was  present  &  saw  the  success  of  his  strati- 
gem,  his  great  soul  disdained  revenge  on  an  enimy 
helpless  &  prostrate  enimy.  He  conjured  the  Siotans 
not  to  shed  one  drop  of  Blood,  but  to  be  generous 
&  merciful.  Bombal  had  now  recovered  from  his 


60  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

surprize,  &  feeling  the  deplorable  situation  of  his 
army,  his  haughty  soul  felt  the  keenest  anguish. 
Where  says  he  is  the  King  of  the  Siotans?  Here  I  am 
says  Hadokam.  What  is  your  re-quest  my  brother? 
Reduced  says  he  by  stratigem  the  most  ingenious  & 
artful  to  a  situation  which  subjects  us  wholly  under 
your  power,  &  in  which  you  can  take  ample  revenge. 
I  now  implore  your  generosity  &  compassion  for  my 
army.  Spare  their  lives  &  then  name  your  terms,  & 
if  I  can  comply  with  them  without  degrading  the 
honour  of  my  crown  it  shall  be  done.  Your  request 
says  Hadokam  is  granted  Surrender  your  army,  &  let 
you  army  return  in  peace.  As  for  your  majesty  & 
the  chiefs  of  your  nation  who  are  present,  you  will 
give  us  the  pleasure  of  your  company  in  our  return 
to  the  city  of  Golanga,  there  we  will  execute  a  treaty 
of  peace  &  amity,  that  shall  be  advantageous  &  hon 
ourable  to  both  nations.  These  terms  were  accepted 
&  the  Kentucks  returned  in  peace  to  their  own  Coun 
try,  not  to  describe  exploits  &  bloody  victories,  but 
the  curious  stratigem  of  Lobaska. 

The  two  kings  &  their  splendid  retinue  of  princes 
having  arived  at  Golanga,  every  attention  was  paid 
by  the  Hodokam  &  his  chiefs  to  their  honorable 
visitors.  Hadokam  made  a  sumptuous  entertainment 
at  which  all  were  present.  The  next  day  both  parties 
met  for  for  the  purpose  of  agreeing  to  terms  of  peace 
&  perpetual  amity.  What  are  your  terms  says  Bom- 
bal?  Lobaska,  says  Hadokam,  shall  be  our  Arbitra 
tor.  He  shall  name  the  terms  his  wisdom  will  dictate 
nothing  which  will  be  dishonourable  for  either  party. 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  61 

Your  proposal,  says  Bombal  is  generous.  Lobaska 
shall  be  our  Arbitrator.  Lobaska  then  rose.  Attend, 
says  he  to  my  words,  ye  princes  of  Siota  &  Kentuck.  t 
You  have  all  derived  your  existence  from  the  great 
Father  of  Spirits,  you  are  his  children  &  belong  to 
his  great  family.  Why,  then  have  you  thirsted  for 
each  others'  blood?  for  the  Blood  of  Brothers? 
&  what  has,  &  what  has  produced  this  mighty  war? 
A  blue  feather,  may  it  please  your  majesties,  a  blue 
feather  a  badge  of  preeminence.  It  is  pride,  it  is 
unruled  ambition  &  avarice  which  devastate  the 
world  &  produce  rivers  of  human  Blood.  &  the  wars 
which  take  place  among  nations  generally  originate 
from  as  trifling  causes  as  the  blue  feather. 

Let  this  be  the  first  article  of  your  treaty  that  any 
person  may  wear  a  blue  feather  in  his  Cap,  or  any 
other  feather  that  he  pleases. 

Let  this  be  the  second,  that  the  individuals  of  each 
nation  may  carry  on  a  commerce  with  each  other,  & 
that  they  shall  be  protected  in  their  persons  & 
property. 

Let  thjsjbe  the  third,  that  I  shall  be  at  liberty  to 
establish  a  school  or  schools  in  any  part  of  the 
dominion  of  Kentuck  &  furnish  them  with  such 
instructors  as  I  please  That  none  shall  be  restrained 
from  hearing  our  instructions  &  that  we  shall  be 
patronized  &  protected  by  the  King  <fc  his  chiefs. 

Let_fhia_be_the  fourth,  that  perpetual  peace  &  amity 
shall  remain  between  both  nations  &  as  a  pledge  for 
the   fulfilment  of  these   articles  on  the  part  of  the* 
princes  of  Kentuck,  that  the  eldest  son  of  the  King  & 


fJ2  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

four  sons  of  the  principal  chiefs,  shall  be  left  as  hos- 
tiges  in  this  City  for  the  term  of  Term  of  Three  years. 
These  terms  met  the  cordial  approbation  of  both 
parties  &  were  ratified  in  the  most  solemn  manner. 

Thus  happy  was  the  termination  of  the  war  about 
the  blue  feather  having  taken  place  Lobaska  pro 
ceeded  with  indefatigable  industry  &  perseverance  in 
his  benevolent  scheme  of  enlightening  &  reforming 
mankind.  And  how  happy  would  it  be  for  mankind 
if  all  wars  about  as  trifling  causes  as  this  might  ter 
minate  in  the  same  way.  The  benevolent  mind  of 
Loboska  soared  above  trifles  viewing  all  mankind  as 
brothers  &  sisters  he  wished  the  happiness  of  all.  He 
then  made  provision  in  the  treaty  with  the  Kentucks 
for  the  introduction  of  schools  in  Kentuck  amongst 
them.  This  was  the  first  step  which  he  foresaw  would 
introduce  improvement  in  agriculture  &  the  mechani 
cal  arts,  produce  a  reformation  in  their  morals  & 
religious  principals,  &  a  happy  revolution  in  some 
part  of  their  political  institutions. 

Bombal  had  become  so  captivated  with  Lobaska, 
that  he  invited  him  to  bear  him  company  to  his  own 
dominions.  He  consented,  &  when  he  had  arived  at 
the  royal  City  of  Gamba,  which  is  situate  on  the 
River  Kentuck,  he  there  pursued  the  same  course 
which  he  had  done  at  Golanga,  &  his  success 
answered  his  most  sanguine  expectations.  The  peo 
ple  were  now  prepared  for  the  introduction  of  a  school. 
He  returned  back  to  Tolanga,  &  sent  his  second  son 
&  three  of  the  most  forward  scholars  of  the  Siotans  to 
establish  a  school  at  Gamba. 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  63 

In  the  meantime  his  intention  was  to  make  some 
a m endments  in  the  government  of  Sciota.  But  as 
there  were  several  Cities  <fc  a  great  number  oTviliages 
that  Acknowledged  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Sciotan 
king  which  still  were  ignorant  of  the  principles  <fc  doc^ 
trines^ which  he  taught,  he  found  it  necessary  to  visit 
them  &  to  introducejnstructors  amongst  them.  In 
t !  i  i  s  work  he  was  engaged^  about  two  years,  <fe  the 
happy  effect  of  his  labors  were  now  visible,  in  various 
kinds  of  improvement  &7n  the  reformation  of  man- 
n ers  morals  &  religion.  The  way  was  now  prepared  to 
introduce  his  system^o^gay^nnient.^jThe  chiefs  of 
the  nation  were  invited  to  attend  a  grand  council  at 

Tolanga. When  th ey  were  met  Lobaska  roBe,~& 

presented   them  with   the  following  constitution  of 
government. 

The  king  of  Siota  shall  be  stiled  the  Emperor  of 
Ohion_&_the  King^f  Siota,  his  crown  shall  be  heredi 
tary  injhej)lde8t  male  heir  of  his  family.  The  cities 
A  vilages  who  acknowledge  his  jurisdiction  or  who 
may  hereafter  do  it,  shall  bejmtitled  to  protection 
tV''mJhe^mjperor1_if ^inyaded_by  an  enimy,  he  shall 
defend  them  with  all  the  force  of  the  Empire.  Once 
every  year,_the  chief  s  shall  meet  at  Golan  ga~  to  nmke 
l.-iwg  for  the  good  of  the  nation. 

These  young  men  having  imbibed  the  spirit  &  prin 
ciple  of  their  great  preceptor,  spared  no  exertions  to 
instruct  the  schollars  &  to  diffuse  useful  knowledge 
amongst  the  people.  The  happy  effects  of  their 
Labors  were  visible  in  a  short  time.  The  people  The 


64  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

people  embraced  the  religion  of  Lobaska  <fc  became 
more  industrious  &  civilized.  In  their  various 
improvements  in  agriculture,  the  mechanical  arts 
they  &  literature  they  even  exeled  the  Sciotans,  & 
appeared  to  be  as  prosperous  &  flourishing.  Even 
Bombal  himself  declared  that  the  termination  of  the 
war  about  the  blue  feather,  which  at  first  appeared 
unfortunate,  yet  as  it  occationed  such  happy  effects 
among  his  people,  it  gave  him  more  satisfaction  & 
pleasure  than  the  reputation  of  being  a  great  Con- 
queror.  what  he  could  have  received  from  the  repu 
tation  of  being  a  great  Conqueror. 

CHAP.  IX. 

GOVERNMENT  &  MONET 

THE  people  who  were  denominated  Ohians  were  set 
tled  on  both  sides  of  the  River  Ohiojrom  &  along  the 
various  branches  of  the  river.  The  settlements 
extended  to  a  great  distance  in  the  time  of  Lobaska, 
but  how  far  it  is  not  mentioned.  They  lived  in  com 
fortable  villages  or  towns  except  the  cities.  We 
might  except  the  cities,  Golanga  on  the  River  Sciota 
&  Gamba  on  the  which  River  Kentuck.  The  various 
villiges  or  towns  formed  independent  soveranties,  & 
were  governed  by  their  respective  chiefs. 

Excepting  the  Cities  of  Golanga  &  Gamba,  whose 
Kings  claimed  jurisdiction  over  an  extent  of  country 
of  country  of  about  one  hundred  &  fifty  miles  along 
the  River  Ohio  &  about  the  same  extent  distance  back 
from  the  River,  the  remaining  part  of  this  extensive 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  65 

country  was  settled  in  compact  vialiges  or  towns  A 
These  formed  independent  soveranties  A  were  gov 
erned  by  their  respective  chiefs.  Frequent  bicker 
ings  contentions  &  wars  took  place  among  these 
chiefs,  which  were  often  attended  with  perilous  con 
sequences.  To  remedy  these  evils  &  to  facilitate  & 
accomplish  the  general  &  benevolent  plan,  of  reform 
ing  &  civilizing  the  Ohians,  Lobaska  had  formed  a 
system  of  Government,  with  a  design  of  establishing 
two  great  Empires  one  on  each  side  of  the  River 
Ohio.  Their  different  constitutions  were  on  the  same 
plan  &  were  presented  by  the  hand  of  Lobaska  to  the 
respective  Kings  of  Sciota  <fc  Kentuck. 

The  Sciotan  Constitution  was  comprised  in  these 
words. 

The  country  east  of  the  great  River  Ohio  shall 
form  the  Empire  of  Sciota.  At  the  head  of  this 
Empire  shall  be  placed  with  the  title  of  Emperor, 
Labamack  the  oldest  son  of  Lobaska.  The  office 
shall  be  hereditary  in  the  eldest  male  of  his  family. 
He  and  his  sons  successively  shall  marry  natives  of 
the  kingdom  of  Sciota  &  all  their  daughters  shall 
marry  within  their  own  dominions.  He  shall  have 
four  counsellors.  He,  with  the  advice  of  his  coun 
sellors,  shall  have  the  exclusive  right,  of  making  war 
&  peace,  <fc  of  forming  treaties  with  other  nations. 
He  shall  be  the  commander  in  chief  of  all  the  forces 
of  the  King  &  the  King  of  Sciota  shall  be  next  to  him. 
All  controversies  between  the  rulers  or  chiefs  of  the 
different  tribes  shall  be  reffered  to  the  decision  of  him 
&  his  counsellors,  &  he  is  authorized  to  compel  a 
compliance.  He  shall  hold  his  settings  annually  in 


66  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY" 

four  different  parts  of  the  Empire.  The  King  of 
Sciota  &  the  chiefs  of  the  different  tribes  shall  hold 
their  offices  &  exercise  the  same  authority  in  civil 
matters  that  they  have  done.  They  shall  be  ameni- 
able  to  the  emperor  &  his  counsellors,  whose  duty  it 
shall  be  to  inquire  into  all  complaints  against  them 
from  their  subjects  &  to  redress  grievances  &  punish 
for  oppression  &  injustice  by  fines.  He  &  his  Coun 
sellors  shall  have  the  explusive  priviledge  of  coining 
money.  They  may  likewise  lay  taxes  for  the  sup 
port  of  the  government  &  for  the  defence  of  the 
nation.  They  shall  coin  no  more  money  than  what 
is  necessary  for  the  convenience  of  the  people,  &  in 
such  quantity  only  that  the  value  shall  not  depre 
ciate.  In  time  of  war  he  shall  appoint  the  officers  of 
his  army  except  where  the  chiefs  chuse  to  command 
their  own  subjects.  In  that  case,  they  shall  be  sub 
ject  to  the  commands  of  the  Emperor.  The  people 
in  every  City  town  or  village  shall  respectively  chuse 
one  or  more  Censors,  whose  duty  it  shall  be  to 
enquire  into  all  mal-conduct  of  rulers,  &  all  vicious 
&  improper  conduct  of  the  priests  &  the  people  &  they 
shall  pursue  such  measures  to  obtain  justice  &  to 
produce  a  reformation  of  morals  in  the  offenders  as 
the  laws  shall  direct. 

In  order  that  the  priests  &  instructors  of  learning 
may  know  &  perform  their  duty  for  the  benefit  of 
civilization,  morality  &  religion,  Lambon  the  third 
son  of  Lobaska  shall  preside  over  them  &  shall  have 
the  title  of  high  Priest,  &  the  office  shall  be  heredi 
tary  in  the  eldest  males  of  his  family  successively. 
There  shall  be  associated  with  him  four  priests  as  his 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  67 

assistants.  They  shall  exercise  a  jurisdiction  over  all 
the  priests  of  the  Empire,  &  shall  see  that  they  faith 
fully  perform  the  duties  of  their  office.  They  shall 
attend  to  the  instructors  of  learning  &  shall  direct 
that  a  suitable  number  are  provided  thro'out  the 
Empire.  It  shall  likewise  be  their  duty  at  all  suita 
ble  times  &  places  to  instruct  Rulers  &  people  in  the 
duties  of  their  respective  Stations,  <fc  to  labour  inces 
santly  to  persuade  mankind  to  restrain  subject  their 
passions  &  appetites  under  the  government  of  Rea 
son,  that  they  may  secure  happiness  to  themselves 
in  this  life  &  immortal  happiness  beyond  the  grave. 
The  people  shall  make  contribution  in  proportion  to 
their  wealth  for  the  support  of  their  priests.  If  any 
refuse  they  shall  be  denied  the  priviledge  of  their 
instructions  &  shall  be  subjected  to  the  ridicule  & 
contempt  of  the  people. 

For  the  convenience  of  the  people  and  the  easy 
support  of  the  government  it  is  necessary  that  there 
government  shou  should  be  something  which  shall 
represent  property,  &  which  is  of  small  weight.  It  is 
therefore  provided  that  certain  small  pieces  of  iron 
stamped  in  a  peculiar  manner  shall  be  this  circu 
lating  medium.  Each  piece  according  to  its  particu 
lar  stamp  shall  have  a  certain  value  fixed  upon  it.  It 
shall  be  the  peculiar  prerogative  of  the  Emperor  & 
his  counsellors  to  direct  the  coining  of  these  pieces, 
which  shall  be  denominated  money.  No  more 
money  shall  be  coined  than  what  will  be  for  the 
benefit  of  the  Empire,  nor  shall  the  Emperor  &  his 
counsellors  receive  any  more  of  it  than  an  adequate 
compensation  for  their  services.  They  shall  keep  an 


68  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

account  of  the  amount  of  money  coined  annually  & 
the  manner  in  which  it  has  been  distributed  & 
expended.  This  account  shall  be  submitted  to  the 
examination  of  the  King  of  Sciota  &  the  chiefs  of  the 
Empire.  The  Emperor  shall  always  be  ready  to 
receive  the  petitions  &  complaints  of  his  subjects, 
He  shall  consult  the  welfare  of  his  people  &  save 
them  from  oppression  &  tyranny  &  by  his  beneficent 
acts  shall  gain  their  affections  &  obtain  the  appella 
tion  of  a  just,  a  good  &  a  glorious  Prince. 

When  Hadocam  King  of  Sciota  had  received  this 
plan  of  government,  he  immediately  assembled  all  the 
chiefs  or  princes  within  his  kingdom.  Lobaska 
pointed  out  the  defects  of  the  existing  governments, 
&  the  excellencies  of  that  form  which  he  presented 
for  their  acceptance.  His  reasons  could  not  be 
resisted,  they  unanimously  agreed  to  establish  it  as 
their  constitution  of  Government.  Labamack 
accepted  the  office  of  Emperor  &  his  four  counsellor 
were  appointed.  Lambon  was  ordained  high  Priest  & 
his  four  assistants  chosen.  The  new  government  was 
now  put  in  operation.  The  various  tribes  living  con 
tiguous  to  the  Empire  seeing  its  prosperity,  solicited 
the  priviledge  of  being  received  as  parts  of  the 
Empire.  Their  requests  were  granted.  Improvement 
&  prosperity  attended  them.  This  induced  other  con 
tiguous  Tribes  to  request  the  same  priviledge,  <fc 
others  still  adjoining  them  came  forward  with  their 
petitions.  All  were  granted  &  the  same  regulations 
established  in  every  part.  Within  about  three  years 
from  the  first  establishment  of  the  Empire,  Lobaska 
had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  his  son  reign  over  a  ter- 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  69 

ritory  of  more  than  four  hundred  miles  in  length 
along  the  River  Ohio,  A  of  beholding  a  nation  rapidly 
progressing  from  a  state  of  barbarism,  ignorance  & 
wretchedness,  to  a  state  of  civilization  4  prosperity. 

Having  now  beheld  the  happy  result  of  his  experi 
ment  at  Sciota,  Lobaska  made  a  second  viset  to 
Bambo  king  of  Kentuck.  The  second  son  whose 
name  was  Hamback,  was  present  at  the  city  of 
Gamba  at  His  youngest  son  Kalo  attended  him.  He 
made  known  his  plan  of  revolution  to  Bambo,  who 
cordially  acquiessed  <fe  called  together  his  princes. 
They  unanimously  agreed  to  place  Hamback  on  the 
throne  of  the  Empire  south  of  the  Ohio  River,  &  to 
ordain  Kalo  as  their  high  Priest.  With  the  excep 
tion  of  names  &  places  the  constitution  of  government 
was  the  same  as  that  which  the  Sciotans  adopted. 
The  same  measures  were  purpued  to  insure  its  suc 
cess.  A  great  &  flourishing  Empire  arose  <fc  barba 
rous  tribes  connected  themselves  with  the  Empire,  & 
under  the  fostering  care  of  the  government  became 
wealthy  civilized  &  prosperous. 

Thus  within  the  term  of  twelve  years  from  the 
arival  of  Lobaska  at  Golanga,  he  had  the  satisfaction 
of  beholding  the  great  &  benevolent  objects  which  he 
had  in  view  accomplished.  He  still  continued  his 
useful  Labours  &  was  the  great  Oriole  of  both 
Empires.  His  advice  &  sentiments  were  taken  upon 
all  important  subjects,  &  no  one  ventured  to  contro 
vert  his  opinions.  He  lived  to  behold  the  successful 
experiment  of  his  institutions,  <fc  to  see  them  acquire 
that  strength  &  firmness  as  not  easily  to  be  over 
thrown. 


70  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

Having-  acquired  that  renown  &  glory  which  are 
beyond  the  reach  of  envy,  &  which  aspiring  ambition 
would  despair  of  attaining,  at  the  age  of  eighty  he 
bade  an  affectionate  adieu  to  two  Empires  &  left  them 
to  lament  in  tears  hisjmle  exit. 

These  two  empires  continued  to  progress  in  their 
improvements  &  population,  &  to  rival  each  other  in 
prosperity  during  the  reign  of  Ten  successive  Emper 
ors  on  the  throne  of  Sciota.  Peace  &  harmony  &  a 
friendly  intercourse  existed  between  them.  No  wars 
took  place  to  disturb  their  tranquility,  except  what 
arose  from  the  surrounding  Savages,  who  sometimes 
disturbed  the  frontiers  in  a  hostile  manner  for  the 
sake  of  gaining  plunder.  But  these  attacks  were 
generally  repelled  &  defeated,  without  much  loss  of 
blood.  They  were  in  fact  of  such  trifling  conse 
quence  as  to  make  no  perceptible  impediment  to 
prevent  the  population  improvement  &  prosperity  of 
both  Empires,  &  happy,  thrice  happy  would  it  have 
been  for  them  if  they  had  still  continued  to  have  pur 
sued  the  amicable  &  benevolent  principles,  which  first 
marked  the  commencement  &  progress  of  their  insti 
tutions. 

CHAT.  X. 

MILETARY     ARRANGEMENTS,     AMUSEMENTS,     CUSTOMS     & 
EXTENT    OP    THE    EMPIRES. 

THE  customs  &  amusements  of  a  Nation  evince  the 
state  of  society  which  exists  among  the  people. 
When  the  two  Empires  of  Sciota  &  Kentuck  had 
commenced  their  new  career  on  the  plan  which  was 


>      \*1  v 

THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY.1'  71 

formed  by  Lobaska,  they  adopted  as  a  true  maxim 
that  to  avoid  wai  it  was  necessary  to  be  in  constant 
preparation  for  it.  It  was  the  wise  policy  of  of  the  two 
governments  to  make  such  military  arrangements  as 
never  to  be  surpriz^  by  any  enimy  unprepared.  In 
every  city  town  &  vir'ge  the  people  were  required  to 
provide  military  impliments,  &  to  deposit  them  in  a 
secure  place.  These  magazines  were  to  contain  a 
sufficient  quantity  of  arms  &  warlike  impliments  to 
furnish  every  man  who  should  be  able  to  bear  arms 
should  be  destitute.  In  order  that  every  man  might 
have  sufficient  skill  to  use  them  to  advantage,  great 
p;iins  was  taken  to  prepare  him  by  teaching  him  the 
arts  of  war. 

The  knowledge  of  military  tackticks  as  they  it  was 
then  attainable,  was  likewise  difused  among  the  peo 
ple.  Young  men  from  sixteen  to  twenty  five  years 
old  were  required  to  take  the  field  four  times  in  each 
year.  &  to  spend  sixteen  days  during  each  time  in 
learning  the  military  art,  <fc  in  building  fortifications. 
And  very  able-bodied  men  were  required  to  spend 
eight  days  in  each  year  in  the  same  employments. 

In  consequence  of  these  regulations  a  rivalship 
existed  among  the  different  sexions  of  the  Empire  to 
exceed  each  other  in  skill  &  dexterity  in  their  mili 
tary  manoevers.  Hence  it  was  a  general  custom  in 
every  part  of  the  country  for  different  bodies  of  men 
to  meet  to  engage  in  feigned  battles  once  every  year, 
in  order  to  make  a  display  of  their  improvements  in 
the  art  of  war.  Premiums  were  given  to  those  who 
were  the  most  expert  in  shooting  the  arrow  or  in 


72  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

managing  the  spear  &  the  sword.  Their  amusements 
were  generally  of  the  athletick  kind,  calculated  to 
improve  their  agility  &  strength  &  prepare  them  for 
warriors.  Wrestling,  slinging,  &  throwing  stones  at 
marks,  leaping  ditches  &  fences  dfc  climbing  trees  & 
pricipices  were  some  of  their  most  favorite  diversions. 
And  as  they  took  great  pains  to  perfect  themselves 
in  these  exercises,  it  would  astonish  Spectators  of 
other  nations,  to  observe  the  improvement  they  had 
made  &  the  extraordinary  feats  of  agility  &  strength 
which  they  exhibited. 

Other  diversions  which  had  no  tendency  to  fit  them 
for  war  they  seldom  practiced,  except  when  in  the 
company  of  women,  being  taught  by  their  religion 
the  social  virtues,  they  manifested  a  great  regard  for 
the  rights  of  the  other  sex  &  always  treated  them  with 
attention  civility  &  tenderness.  Hence,  when  in  the 
company  of  the  fair  sex  it  was  curious  to  observe 
that  when  in  the  company  of  women  they  easily 
exchanged  the  warriors  ruged  AJbold  attitude  of  the 
bold  warrior  for  the  complasant  &  tender  deport 
ment  of  the  affectionate  galant.  The  amusements 
which  were  pleasing  to  the  female  mind  were  equally 
pleasing  to  the  men,  whenever  they  held  their  social 
meeting  for  recreation.  These  meetings  were  fre 
quent  among  the  younger  class  of  Citizens,  whether 
married  or  single.  Various  kinds  of  amusements 
would  frequently  be  introduced  at  such  times  for 
their  mutual  entertainment,  but  that  which  held  the 
most  conspicuous  place  was  dancing.  But  their 
manner  of  Dancing  was  different  from  that  of  the 
polished  Europians.  Gracefulness  &  easy  attitude 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  73 

were  not  so  much  studied  in  their  movements  as 
sprightliness  &  agility,  &  those  tunes  which  admitted 
the  greatest  display  of  activity  &  sprightliness  were 
generally  the  most  pleasing  fashionable.  Hence 
those  whose  bodies  were  formed  for  the  quickest 
movements  if  they  keept  time  with  the  music,  were 
the  most  admired.  In  small  assemblies  it  was  fash 
ionable  to  amuse  themselves  with  at  playing  with 
pieces  of  parchment.  This  they  denominate  the 
Bird  Play.  Each  peice  o_f  is  of  an  oval  form  A  of 
convenient  length  &  width  &  on  each  one  is  portraid 
the  likeness  of  a  Bird.  All  the  birds  of  Prey  that 
came  within  their  knowledge  have  the  honour  of 
being  represented  on  these  peices  of  Parchment.  On 
the  other  pieces  are  portraid  other  birds  of  different 
kinds  The  whole  number  of  the  peices  amount  to 
about  sixty.  These  are  promiscuous  placed  in  a  pack 
&  dealt  of  to  the  company  of  players  whose  number 
does  not  exceed  six.  The  person  then,  who  has  the 
greatest  number  of  carnivorous  Birds  by  a  dextrous 
management,  may  catch  the  greatest  number  of  the 
other  Birds  &  thus  obtain  the  victory. 

During  these  enterviews  of  the  different  sexes  <fc 
even  in  their  common  intercouse  with  each  other  they 
are  always  very  cheerful  &  sociable  <fc  often  display 
that  fondness  &  familiarity,  which  in  Europe  would 
be  considered  as  indicative  of  a  lascivious  character, 
but  in  this  country  are  considered  as  what  good  man 
ners  requird^  Nothing  rude  nothing  indecent  or 
immodest  according  to  their  ideas  of  the  meaning  of 
these  terms,  are  admissible  in  company,  <fc  absolute 


74  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY.1' 

lasciviousness  would  meet  the  most  severe  reprehen 
sion.  When  a  young  man  wishes  to  settle  himself  in 
a  family  state  he  proclaims  it  by  wearing  a  red  feather 
in  his  cap.  This  is  considered  as  an  admonition  to 
the  young  women  who  would  not  receive  him  for  a 
husband,  to  avoid  his  company,  whereas  those  whose 
inclinations  towards  him  are  more  favourable  admit 
his  attentions.  From  this  number  he  selects  one  as 
the  object  of  his  addresses.  He  obtains  an  enterview 
&  proposes  a  courtship.  If  the  proposition  accords 
with  her  wishes,  they  then  agree  on  a  time  when  he 
shall  make  known  the  affair  to  her  parents,  whose 
approbation  being  obtained,  he  is  then  permited  to 
viset  her  ten  times  in  sixty  days.  At  the  expiration 
of  this  time  the  bargain  for  matrimony  must  be  fin 
ished.  Otherwise  there  must  be  a  final  termination 
of  the  courtshi  or  a  postponement  of  the  courtship, 
for  the  term  of  one  year,  or  else  a  The  parties  are  at 
liberty  during  the  postponement  to  But  if  the  parties 
are  pleased  with  each  other,  the  contract  is  made  & 
the  time  for  the  celebra  performance  of  the  nuptial 
ceremonies  is  appointed.  An  entertainment  is  pro 
vided  made  friends  are  invited  &  the  Bridegroom  & 
the  Bride  present  themselves  in  their  best  apparel. 
The  company  form  a  circle  &  they  take  their  stand  in 
the  centre.  The  father  of  the  Bride  speaks.  For 
what  purpose  do  you  present  yourselves  They 
answer,  to  join  hands  in  wedlock.  Our  hearts  are 
already  joined,  &  we  have  made  a  solemn  contract 
covenant  to  be  true  &  faithful  to  each  other.  The 
company  then  all  explain.  "Blessings  will  attend 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  75 

you  if  ye  fulfil,  but  Curses  if  ye  transgress.  They 
are  then  conducted  jinto  a  log,  round  which  a  Rope  is 
tied.  The  Bride  groom  takes  hold  of  one  end  of  the 
rope  &  the  Bride  the  other,  <fc  being  commanded  to 
draw  the  log  into  the  house.  They  pull  in  opposite 
directions  with  all  their  might.  Having  worried 
themselves  for  some  time  to  no  purpose  to  the  great 
diversion  of  the  company,  the  parents  of  both  parties 
step  forward  &  giving  them  a  severe  reprimand,  com 
mand  them  to  draw  in  the  same  direction.  They 
instantly  obey  &  the  Log  is  easily  drawn  to  its  des 
tined  place.  The  rest  of  the  time  is  spent  in  great 
cheerfulness,  &  meriment.  They  partake  of  the 
entertainment  &  conclude  with  customary  amuse 
ments.  The  Bridegroom  &  Bride  are  now  desirous  to 
form  a  family  by  themselves.  If  their  parents  are  of 
sufficient  ability  they  furnish  them  with  a  convenient 
house  &  such  furniture  as  will  be  required  for  family 
use  &  such  other  property  as  they^will  need  to  enable 
them  to  obtain  a  comfortable  living.  But  if  their 
parents  are  poor  they  receive  a  pittance  &  contribu 
tions  from  relations  &  neighbours,  db  are  placed  in  such 
a  situation  that  with  proper  industry  &  econimy  they 
can  live  live  above  indigence  <fe  enjoy  life  agreeably. 
At  the  time  they  enter  their  new  habitation  they  are 
attended  by  Priests  <fc  by  their  relation  &  friends. 
They  kneel  in  the  centre  of  the  Room  <fc  the  Priest 
places  his  right  hand  on  the  head  of  the  Bridegroom 
&  his  left  on  the  head  of  the  Bride.  After  explaining 
&  enjoining  in  the  most  solemn  manner  the  various 
duties  of  the  married  state,  he  concludes  his  injunc 
tions  with  these  words.  "My  Dear  children,  I  con- 


76  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

jure  you  as  you  regard  your  own  peace  <fe  felicity,  as 
you  would  wish  to  acquire  wealth  <fe  reapectibility__A 
set  an  example  worthy  of  emitation,  that  as  you  are 
now  yoked  together  to  draw  in  the  same  direction. 
They  then  rise  &  he  presents  each  with  a  piece  of 
Parchment  on  which  is  written  Draw  in  the  same 
direction  All  the  duties  of  the  conjugal  state  in 
their  opinion  are  comprized  in  this  injunction  Com 
mand. 

As  the  Priests  <fe  the  Censors  were  vigilent  &  care- 
f ul  to  required  to  see  that  parents  restrained  the 
vices  of  their  children  &  instructed  them  in  the 
knowledge  of  their  religious  principles  the  effects 
were  very  conspicuous. 

Having  been  early  taught  to  restrain  the  govern 
their  passions  &  to  regard  the  practice  of  virtue  as 
their  greatest  good,  it  was  generally  the  case  that 
love  friendship  &  harmony  existed  in  families.  & 
when  parents  were  treated  by  their  children  with 
great  tenderness  &  respect 

Parents  manifested  an  anxious  solicitude  for  the 
future  welfare  &  respectibility  of  their  children,  &  in 
their  turn  children  treated  their  parents  with  respect 
&  reverence.  Nor  did  they  forsake  them  in  old  age, 
but  paid  provided  liberally  for  their  support  &^ 

But  we  are  not  to  suppose  that  in  the  most  virtu 
ous  age  of  the  nation  all  were  virtuous.  Far  from 
this.  But  with  such  punctual  exactness  were  the 
laws  executed,  in  the  most  prosperous  state  of  the 
nation,  that  vice  &  impiety  had  but  few  advocates  & 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  77 

the  wicked  were  ashamed  of  their  own  characters. 
Tho'  every  vice  was  prohibited  by  law,  yet  the  pen 
alties  were  not  severe.  Murder  alone  was  punished 
with  death.  With  respect  to  other  Laws,  they  were  cal 
culated  to  wound  the  pride  &  ambition  of  the  trans 
gressor,  <fc  produce  shame  <fc  regret.  Adultery  was- 
is  punished  by  obliging  the  Culprit  to  wear  a  pair  of 
Elk  horns  on  his  shoulders  six  days,  &  to  walk  thro* 
the  City  or  vilage  once  each  day,  at  which  times 
the  boys  are  at  liberty  to  pelt  him  with  rotten  eggs. 
The  thief  is  compelled  to  make  ample  restitution. 
For  the  third  offense  he  is  covered  with  tar  &  feath 
ers  &  exhibited  as  a  specticle  for  laughter  &  ridicule. 
Pugilists  or  boxers,  if  they  are  equally  to  blame  for 
fighting,  are  yoked  together  at  least  one  day,  &  in 
this  situation  are  presented  to  the  view  of  the  multi 
tude.  They  must  wear  the  yoke  until  the  quarrel 
is  settled.  Such  being  the  nature  of  their  penal 
laws  &  such  the  punctuality  of  executing  the  penal 
ties  on  offenders  that  crimes  were  far  less  frequent  in 
this  country  than  in  Europe,  where  the  Laws  are 
more  severe,  &  offenders  more  often  escape  punish 
ment.  Tho'  learning  civilization  &  refinement  had 
not  arrived  at  that  state  of  perfection,  in  which  they 
exist  in  a  great  part  of  the  Roman  Empire,  yet  the 
two  Empires  of  Sciota  &  Kentuck  during  their  long 
period  of  peace  &  prosperity,  were  not  less  happy  As 
luxury  and  extravagance  were  scarcely  known  to 
exist  especially  among  the  common  people,  an 
happy  equality  was  hence  there  was  a  great  simi 
larity  in  their  manner  of  living,  their  dress,  their 
habits  &  manners.  Pride  was  not  bloated  &  puffed 


78  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

up  with  enormous  wealth.  Nor  had  envy  fewel  to 
inflame  her  hatred  &  malice.  As  the  two  Empires 
were  not  displeased  with  each  others  prosperity  & 
happiness  &  the  two  governments  had  no  thirst  nor 
jealous  of  nor  jealous  of  each  others  power,  &  as  the 
governments  were  not  infested  with  a  thirst  for  con 
quest,  Peace  of  consequence  waved  her  olive  branch, 
&  the  malignant  passions  lay  dormant.  Avarice  & 
corruption  did  not  contaminate  the  ruling  powers  nor 
bribery  infest  the  seats  of  justice.  The  people  felt 
secure  in  the  enjoyment  of  their  rights,  &  desirous 
to  raise  up  families  to  partake  of  the  same  blessings 
which  they  enjoyed 

We  can  now  trace  the  causes  of  their  increase  & 
prosperity.  To  a  religion  which  presented  powerful 
motives  to  restrain  vice  &  impiety,  &  encourage  vir 
tue.  To  the  difusion  of  a  competent  share  of  learn 
ing  &  knowledge  to  enable  the  people  to  understand 
their  right  &  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  social  intercourse. 
To  the  establishment  of  political  institutions,  which 
gagrded  property  &  life  against  oppressing  injustice  & 
tyranny..  To  the  knowledge  which  the  people 
obtained  of  agriculture  &  the  mechanical  arts  &  their 
habits  of  industry  &  econimy.  To  the  mild  nature 
of  their  laws  &  the  certainty  of  executing  the  penalty 
upon  transgressors,  &  to  such  an  equality  of  property 
as  to  prevent  the  pride  of  wealth  &  the  extravagance 
of  Luxury.  To  such  causes  may  be  ascribed  the 
rapid  encrease  of  population,  &  the  apparent  content 
ment  &  felicity  which  extended  thro'  every  part  of 
the  country  of  the  Empires.  We  might  add  like  wise 
the  long  peace  that  continued  &  the  friendly  inter- 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  79 

course  that  existed  between  the  two  rival  Empires. 
A  peace  which  had  no  interruption  for  the  term  of 
near  five  hundred  years.  During  this  time  their  vil 
lages  &  cities  were  greatly  enlarged,  new  settlements 
were  formed  in  every  part  of  the  country  which  had 
not  been  inhabited,  &  towns  a  vast  number  of  towns 
were  built,  which  rivaled  as  to  number  of  inhabitants, 
those  which  existed  at  the  time  their  imperial  govern 
ments  were  founded.  Their  settlements  extended  the 
whole  length  of  the  great  River  Ohio  to  its  confluence 
with  the  Mississippi,  <fc  over  the  whole  country  on 
both  sides  of  the  Ohio  River,  which  are  watered  by 
streams  which  empty  into  it.  And  also  along  the 
great  lakes  of  Eri  &  Mishigan,  &  even  some  settle 
ments  were  formed  in  some  parts  of  the  country 
which  borders  on  Lake  Ontarion.  Such  was  the  vast 
extent  of  the  country  which  they  inhabited,  &  such 
the  fertility  of  the  soil,  that  many  milions  were  easily 
fed  &  supported  with  such  a  plenty,  &  competence  of 
provision  as  was  necessary  for  their  comfort  &  hap 
piness. 

During  the  time  of  their  rising  greatness  &  tran 
quillity,  their  policy  led  them  to  fortify  the  country  in 
every  part,  the  interior  as  well  as  the  frontiers.  This 
they  did  partly  for  their  own  safety,  provided  a  war 
should  take  place,  &  they  should  be  invaded  by  an 
enimy,  &  partly  to  keep  alive  a  military  &  improve  a 
warlike  spirit,  &  the  knowledge  of  military  tackticks. 
Near  every  vilage  or  City  they  constructed  forts  or 
fortifications  These  were  generally  of  an  oval  form  & 
of  different  dimentions  according  to  the  number  of 
inhabitants  who  lived  in  the  town.  The  Ramparts  or 


80  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

walls  were  formed  of  dirt  which  was  taken  in  front  of 
the  fort.  A  deep  canal  or  trench  would  likewise  be 
formed.  This  would  still  increase  the  dificulty  of 
surmounting  the  walls  in  front  In  addition  to  this 
they  inserted  sticks  pieces  of  Timber  on  the  top  of 
the  Ramparts.  These  peices  were  about  seven  feet 
in  length  from  the  ground  to  top,  which  was  sharp- 
ned.  The  distance  between  each  piece  was  about 
six  inches,  thro'  which  they  would  shoot  their  arrows 
against  an  Enimy.  Some  of  their  fortifications  have 
two  Ramparts  which  run  paralel  with  each  other, 
built  in  the  same  manner  with  a  distance  between  of 
about  two  or  three  perches.  Their  gates  are  strong 
&  well  constructed  for  defense.  Within  these  forts 
are  likewise  a  number  of  small  houses,  for  the  accom 
modation  of  the  army  &  inhabitants,  in  case  of  an 
invasion  <fc  likewise  a  storehouse  for  the  reception  of 
provisions  &  arms.  A  country  thus  fortified,  con 
taining  so  many  milions  of  inhabitants  hearty  & 
robust  &  with  habits  formed  for  war,  might  well  be 
supposed  as  able  to  defend  themselvs  against  an 
invading  enimy.  If  they  were  beat  from  the  frontier, 
they  would  still  retreat  back  to  the  fortifications  in 
the  interior  &  there  make  a  successful  stand.  But 
what  avails  all  the  wisdom,  the  art  &  the  works  of 
men,  what  avails  their  valour  their  strength  &  num 
bers,  when  the  Almighty  God  is  provoked  to  chastise 
them,  &  to  execute  his  vengeance  in  their  overthrow 
&  destruction. 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT 


( 


CHAT.  XI. 

As  the  Sciotans  &  the  Kentuoks  had  maintained 
with  eaoh  other  an  unterrupted  peace  &  friendly 
intercourse  for  the  space  of  four  hundred  &  eighty 
years,  it  seems  almost  incredible  that  a  Cause  which 
was  of  no  great  importance  to  either  nation,  should 
excite  their  resentment  against  each  other  &  produce 
all  the  horrors  of  war.  But  such  was  the  unhappy 
effect  of  an  affair,  which  had  no  regard  to  a  single 
person  except  the  imperial  families  Gi  the  two  empires 
&  the  king  of  Sciota.  As  the  families  had  were 
dessended  from  the  great  Lobaska,  they  had  during 
the  reign  of  all  their  Emperors  been  in  the  habit  of 
visiting  each  other,  but  as  each  Emperor  &  his  chil 
dren  were  required  not  to  marry  out  of  their  respec 
tive  dominions,  no  intermariages  had  taken  place. 
They  however  claimed  relationship,  &  still  continued 
to  each  other  the  appelation  of  our  dearest  &  best 
beloved  Cousen. 

A  Cousen  of  this  description,  who  was  the  eldest 
son  of  Hamboon,  the  Emperor  of  Kentuck  arrived  at 
the  City  of  Golanga  with  a  small  but  splendid  retinue 
of  Friends.  At  that  time  Rambock,  who  was  the 
fourteenth  Emperor,  was  seting  on  the  throne  of 
Sciota.  He  received  the  young  Prince  with  apparent 
sensation  of  the  highest  pleasure,  &  spared  no  pains 
to  manifest  towards  him  by  his  treatment  the  greatest 
esteem  &  friendship.  The  Emperor  had  an  only  son 


82  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

whose  name  was  Moonrod.  He  ordered  him  to  attend 
the  young  prince  &  to  treat  him  with  every  token  of 
affection  &  honour.  They  spent  their  time  in  receiv 
ing  visets  from  the  officers  of  the  government,  in 
viewing  curiosities,  &  in  the  assemblies  of  the  first 
Class  of  young  citizens  who  met  for  recreation. 

Elseon,  for  this  was  the  name  of  the  young  prince, 
was  soon  after  his  arival  introduced  to  Lamesa,  the 
eldest  daughter  of  the  Emperor.  She  was  a  young 
Lady  of  a  very  fair  &  beautiful  countenance.  Her 
features  &  the  construction  of  her  person  were  formed 
to  please  the  fancy,  whilst  the  ease  &  gracefulness  & 
modesty  of  her  deportment,  were  very  pleasing  to  all 
her  acquaintance.  Her  mind  was  replenished  with 
the  principles  of  knowledge  &  virtue  &  such  was  her 
vivacity  and  the  ease  with  which  she  expressed  her 
ideas,  that  all  were  delighted  with  her  conversation. 
No  wonder  that  this  fair  imperial  dansel  attracted  the 
attention  of  Elsion,  &  at  their  first  enterview  enkindled 
a  spark  in  his  boosom,  which  he  could  hardly  prevent 
from  being  discovered  thro  his  blushing  counta- 
nance,  &  the  embarassment  he  felt  in  conversation. 
He  strove  to  erase  those  tender  impressions  which 
she  had  made  on  his  heart,  but  in  vain;  every 
renewed  enterview  only  served  only  to  fix  her  image 
deeper  in  his  mind  with  &  to  make  the  flame  of  Love 
more  difficult  to  extinguish.  He  reasoned  on  the 
obsticles  in  the  way  of  obtaining  this  young  lady  for 
his  partner,  but  instead  of  cooling  only  ser  it  only 
increased  the  ardor  of  his  passion,  &  produced  a 
resolution  that  with  the  consent  of  Lamesa,  nothing 
should  prevent  the  attainment  of  his  wishes. 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  83 

To  a  mind  thus  ardent  which  possessed  the  native 
courage,  resolution  &  perseverance  of  Elseo,  the  most 
gigantic  obsticles  would  vanish  into  vapour.  Nor 
was  it  long  before  he  found  that  a  correspondent  pas 
sion  was  excited  in  her  breast.  The  moment  she  first 
saw  him,  her  heart  palpitated,  her  face  was  covered 
with  crimson,  she  turned  her  eyes  &  attempted  to 
speak,  her  tongue  stopt  its  motion  in  the  midle  of  a 
period.  She  .named,  sat  down  &  observed  that  she 
was  not  well.  A  description  of  this  scene  is  painted 
by  a  Sciotan  bard  in  poetic  numbers.  He  represents 
the  young  Lady  as  recovering  in  a  short  time  from  this 
state  of  agitation  <fc  confusion,  &  as  being  afterwards 
composed  &  having  a  better  command  of  her  pas 
sions.  To  follow  the  poet  in  the  description  which  he 
gives  of  Elseon,  to  whom  he  attaches  a  countenance 
&  figure  superior  to  other  mortals,  &  qualities  which 
produced  the  universal  esteem  &  admiration,  would 
not  comport  with  the  faithful  page  of  history.  Suf 
fice  it  to  say  that  Lamesa  was  captivated  with  his 
person,  &  was  impressed  with  those  ideas  <fc  senti 
ments  that  her  happiness  fled  except  when  she  either 
enjoyed  or  anticipated  his  company.  After  Elsion 
had  firmly  determined  to  marry  Lamesa,  he  was 
impatient  for  a  private  enterview  with  her  to  disclose 
his  sentiments.  This  occured  in  a  short  time.  They 
were  together  in  one  of  the  apartments  of  the  Emper 
ors  palace,  the  company  had  all  retired.  I  have,  said 
he  in  a  low  voice  to  Lamesa,  conceived  that  opinion 
of  you  that  I  hope  you  will  not  be  displeased  if  I 
express  my  feelings  with  frankness  &  sincerity. 
You  must,  she  replied,  be  the  best  judge  of  what  it  is 


84  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

proper  for  you  to  express.  I  am  always  pleased  with 
sincerity.  As  the  sun,  says  he,  my  dear  Lamesa, 
when  he  rises  with  his  radiant  beams,  dispels  the 
darkness  of  knight,  so  it  is  in  your  power  to  dispel 
the  clouds  of  anxiety  that  rest  upon  my  soul.  The 
Crown  of  Kentuck  will  be  like  a  Rock  on  my  head, 
unless  you  will  condesend  to  share  with  me  the  glory 
&  felicity  of  my  reign.  Will  you  consent  to  be  my 
dearest  friend  &  companion  for  life?  There  is 
nothing,  she  replies,  would  give  me  more  pleasure 
than  a  compliance  with  your  request,  provided  it 
shall  meet  the  approbation  of  my  Father.  But 
how  can  he  consent,  when  our  Constitution  requires 
that  his  daughters  should  marry  in  his  own  domin 
ions?  Beside,  my  father  intends  that  I  shall  receive 
the  King  of  Sciota  for  my  husband.  By  perform  - 
ming,  says  he,  the  oerimonies  of  maraige  at  Talanga, 
we  shall  literally  comply  with  the  imperial  constitu 
tion,  as  Talanga  is  within  the  dominions  of  your 
Father.  But  as  for  the  King  of  Sciota,  do  you  sin 
cerely  wish  to  have  him  for  a  husband?  No,  she 
quickly  replies,  speaks  anger  sparkled  in  her  eyes. 
No.  the  King  of  Sciota  for  my  husband.  His  pride, 
his  haughtiness,  the  pomposity  of  all  his  movements 
excite  my  perfect  disgust.  I  should  as  leave  be 
yoked  to  a  porcupine.  Several 

These  Lovers,  as  you  may  well  conjecture,  said 
many  things  too  tender  &  endearing  to  please  the 
taste  of  the  common  Class  of  Lovers.  In  this  enter- 
view  which  lasted  about  four  hours,  they  exchanged 
the  most  transporting  expression  of  love,  made  the 
most  solemn  protests  vows  of  sincerity  &  perpetual 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  86 

friendship  &  finally  agreed  that  Elseon  should  make 
known  to  the  Emperor  their  mutual  desire  to  be  joined 
in  wedlock.  The  next  day  he  wrote  to  the  Emperor 
as  follows. 

May  it  please  your  most  excellent  Majesty.  Per 
mit  me  to  express  my  most  sincere  gratitude  for  the 
high  favors  &  honour,  which  thro'  the  beneficence  of 
of  your  Majesty  I  have  enjoyed  in  your  dominions. 
I  am  likewise  impelled  to  request  a  favour,  which  to 
me  would  be  the  most  precious  gift,  that  is  in  the 
power  of  your  Majesty  to  bestow.  Having  contracted 
an  acquaintance  with  your  most  amiable  daughter 
Lamesa,  &  finding  that  a  correspondent  affection  A 
esteem  exist  in  our  hearts  toward  each  other  A  a 
mutual  desire  to  be  united  by  the  solemn  covenant  of 
maraige,  I  would  therefore  solicit  your  Majesty's  per 
mission  that  such  a  connection  be  formed. 

Such  a  connection  I  conceive,  may  in  its  effect  be 
very  salutary  &  beneficial  to  bothe  Empires.  It  will 
unite  the  two  imperial  families  in  a  nearer  in  the  bond 
of  consanguinity,  A  fix  upon  them  an  additional  obli 
gation  to  cultivate  friendship,  peace  &  an  amiable 
intercourse.  It  will  strengthen  the  sinues  of  both 
governments  &  promote  &  promote  an  happy  inter 
change  of  friendly  offices.  As  to  the  objection  that 
might  arise  from  the  constitution  requiring,  that  the 
Emperors  daughters  should  marry  in  his  own  domin 
ions,  this  according  to  its  literal  meaning  can  have 
respect  only  to  the  place  where  the  Emperors 
daughter  shall  marry.  If  by  your  Majestys  permis 
sion,  I  should  marry  your  daughter  Lamesa  in  your 
dominions  it  will  be  a  literal  fulfillment  of  the  oonsti- 


88  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY.'1 

tution.  From  this  ground  therefore,  I  conceive  that 
no  objection  of  any  weight  can  arise.  Will  your 
majesty  please  to  vouchsafe  me  an  answer  to  my 
request. 

Signed.    ELSEON.    PRINCE  OF  KENTUOK. 

This  letter  was  presented  to  the  Emperor  by 
Helicon,  an  intimate  friend  of  Elseon.  The  Emperor 
read  it  assumed  the  aspect  of  deep  consideration, 
walked  the  room  a  few  moments,  then  took  a  seat 
&  told  Helicon  that  he  might  inform  the  young 
prince  that  he  should  receive  an  answer  in  a  ten 
days. 

But  why  this  few  Ten  days,  a  long  time  for  two 
ardent  lovers  to  remain  in  suspense.  But  the  Em 
peror  must  consult  his  counsellors,  his  priests  &  the 
last  &  most  fatal  counsellor  of  all  the  King  of  Sciota, 
who  presumed  to  claim  the  hand  of  the  fair  Lamesa. 
The  affair  became  public.  The  popular  sintiment  at 
first  favoured  the  connection.  The  Emperors  coun 
sellors  &  his  priests  were  at  first  inclined  to  recom 
mend  an  affirmative  answer.  But  the  interest  of  the 
Sciotan  King  soon  prevailed.  This  produced  a  dif 
ferent  view  of  the  subject  The  Counsellors  perceived 
that  such  a  connection  would  be  a  most  flagrant 
violation  of  the  true  meaning  &  spirit  of  the  constitu 
tion,  &  the  priests  considered  that  it  would  be  an  act 
of  the  greatest  impiety,  as  it  transgress  an  explicit 
injunction  of  the  great  founder  of  their  government 
&  religion.  This  opinion  had  vast  Weight  on  the 
minds  of  a  great  majority  of  the  people.  The  more 
liberal  sort  vindicated  the  cause  of  Elseon.  This 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  87 

produced  a  great  debate  altercation  A  confusion  thro* 
the  City.  All  were  anxious  to  know  the  Emperora 
decision. 

On  the  tenth  day  the  Emperor  transmitted  to  the 
prince  the  following  answer  to  his  letter. 

To  our  best  beloved  Cousen  Elseon  Prince  of  Ken- 
tuck.  The  letter  we  received  from  your  highness  has 
impressed  our  hearts  with  a  deep  sense  of  the  honor 
&  benefit,  which  you  intended  uor  family  &  Empire. 
At  first  we  were  inclined  to  accept  of  the  alliance  you 
proposed.  But  having  examined  <fe  considered  the 
subject  with  great  seriousness  &  attention,  we  that 
find  that  to  admit  your  Highness  who  is  not  a  citizen 
of  our  Empire  to  marry  into  our  family,  would  be  a 
most  flagrant  violation  of  the  true  meaning  <fe  spirit 
of  our  constitution.  &  an  impious  outrage  on  the 
sacred  memory  of  its  Founder  For  these  reasons  we 
must  solicit  your  Highness  not  to  insist  on  our  com 
pliance  with  your  request. 

Signed.      HAMBOCK,  EMPEROR  OF  SCIOTA. 

As  Elseon  had  been  informed  of  the  complexion 
which  his  affairs  had  assumed  in  the  court,  &  thro' 
the  City,  he  was  prepared  for  the  alswer  which  he 
received. 

Without  manifesting  the  least  chagrin  or  Resent 
ment,  he  appeared  to  acquiesse  in  the  decision  of  the 
Emperor.  He  displayed  his  in  his  countenance,  his 
conversation  <fc  deportment,  his  usual  cheerfulness 
&  vivacity.  He  continued  his  amusements  &  asso 
ciated  with  company  with  the  same  ease,  gracefulness 
&  dignified  conduct  which  he  had  done  before.  At 


88  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

the  same  time,  his  determination  was  fixed  to  trans 
port  the  fair  Lamesa  into  his  fathers  dominions.  The 
first  enterview  he  had  with  her  after  he  received  the 
Emperors  letter,  he  informed  her  of  its  contents.  She 
trembled,  paleness  began  to  cover  her  face,  &  had 
not  Elseon  received  her  into  his  arms,  perhaps  she 
would  have  falen  from  her  seat  However,  by  a  few 
soothing  words  and  caresses,  she  was  restored  to  her 
former  composure  &  recollection.  Believe  me,  quoth 
he,  my  Dearest  Lamesa,  you  shall  be  mine.  This 
heart  shall  be  torn  from  my  bosom,  &  these  limbs 
from  my  body,  nothing  else  shall  prevent  our  union 
&  compleat  enjoyment  of  happiness.  Can  the  ancient 
scribbling  of  a  great  sage  or  the  degree  of  an  Em 
peror  prevent  the  streams  from  uniting  with  the  ocean? 
With  the  same  ease  &  propriety  can  they  prevent  the 
union  of  our  hands,  since  our  hearts  are  united. 
With  your  consent,  you  shall  be  mine.  Is  it  possible, 
she  replies,  is  it  possible  to  disregard  the  authority 
of  an  indulgent  &  beloved  parent  &  disobey  his  com 
mand.  This  I  never  did.  What  if  he  should  com 
mand  you,  says  Elseao,  to  marry  the  King  of  Sciota? 
would  you  obey?  He  might,  she  replies,  with  more 
regard  to  my  happiness,  command  me  to  plunge  a 
dagger  into  my  heart.  I  cannot  endure  that  super 
cilious  bundle  of  pride  &  affectation. 

At  this  moment  her  maid  entered  the  room  & 
gave  her  a  letter.  I  received  this  letter,  she  says, 
from  your  Brother,  who  told  me  it  was  from  the 
Emperor.  She  opened  it  &  read. 

My  Dearest  &  best  beloved  Daughter. 

Having  the  most  tender  &   affectionate 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  89 

regard  for  your  future  welfare  A  felicity,  we  have 
concluded  a  treaty  of  marriage  between  you  <fc 
Lambul  the  King  of  Sciota.  This  alliance  will  be 
honourable  to  our  family  &  be  productive  of  many 
benefits  to  the  Empire.  On  the  tenth  day  from  this 
time  the  nuptial  ceremonies  will  be  celebrated,  con 
summated  in  our  Palace.  You  will  be  in  readiness  & 
yield  a  cheerful  compliance  with  our  will. 

Signed.  BAMBOCK.  EM'R  OP  SCIOTA. 
Had  the  lightning  flashed  from  the  clouds  &  pierced 
her  heart,  it  could  not  have  produced  a  more  instan 
taneous  effect.  She  fell  into  the  arms  of  Elseon,  the 
maid  ran  for  a  cordial.  Elseon  rubed  her  temples 
&  hands  &  loosened  the  girdle  about  her  waist. 
Within  about  an  hour  her  blood  began  to  circulate. 
Elseon  to  his  inexpressible  joy  felt  her  pulse  begin 
to  beat,  &  perceived  flashes  of  colour  in  her  face. 
With  a  plaintive  groon,  she  once  more  opened  her 
eyes  to  the  beams  of  day,  &  in  a  kind  of  wild  dis 
traction  exclaimed,  Ah  cruel,  cruel  Father,  why  have 
you  doomed  your  daughter  to  a  situation  the  most 
odious  &  disgustful.  As  well  might  you  have  thrown 
her  into  a  den  of  porcupines,  opossums  A  serpents. 
With  such  animals  I  could  enjoy  life  with  less  disgust 
<fc  torment,  than  with  this  mighty  King  of  Sciota,  and 
An  alliance  with  him  an  honour  to  our  family,  an 
honour  to  the  descendants  of  the  great  Lobaska! 
What  wicked  counsellors  have  deceived  my  Father,  & 
induced  him  to  throw  me  into  the  arms  of  this  hateful 
monster?  Ah,  whither  shall  I  fly  &  escape  my  bar- 
berous  destiny.  I  am  your  protector,  says  Elseon.  | 
am  your  friend  &  will  conduct  you  beyond  the  loving 


90  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

&  gigantic  grasp  of  Sambol.  His  loathsome  arms 
shall  never  encircle  my  dear  Lamesa.  Consent  to 
my  request  &  we  will  be  within  ten  days  at  the  City 
of  Gamba.  There  you  will  be  esteemed  as  the 
brightest  Orniment  of  my  Fathers  Empire.  No 
longer  Oh  Elseon,  she  exclaimed,  can  I  refuse  my 
consent  to  your  proposal.  When  a  compliance  with 
my  fathers  commands  will  entail  wretchedness  & 
misery  thro'  life.  Heaven  will  pardon  my  disobe 
dience.  Yes,  Elseo,  I  will  go  with  you,  &  place  my 
happiness  in  your  power,  rather  than  fall  into  the 
hands  of  this  haughty  Sambul. 

What  could  she  say  more  to  excite  the  feelings  of  a 
heartTstruggling  under  the  operation  of  different  pas 
sions  &^pposite^motives.  She  has  taken  her  resolu 
tion,  love  has  gained  the  preeminence  over  every 
obsticle 

At  this  resolution,  Elseon  was  transported  with  joy. 
He  now  proceedejMx)  form  his  plans  for  their  flight. 
On  the  fourth  day  after,  he  called  upon  the  Emperor 
&  requested  his  permission  to  depart  to  his  own 
Country^  The  Emperor  importuned  him  to  tarry  &  be 
one  of  the  guests  at  Lamesas  wedding.  But  he 
declined  ^by  urging  as  his  apology  the  anxiety  & 
impatience  of  his  father  for  his  return.  Permission 
was  granted,  &  the  Emperor  aded  that  he  should  do 
himself  the  honour  to  furnish  the  prince  with  an 
escort  when  he  left  the  city.  Elseon  replied  that  as 
he  was  not  fond  of  much  parade,  he  would  wish  that 
the  escort  might  not  consist  of  the  Emperors  soldiers, 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  91 

only  his  friend  <fe  his  daughter  A  with  with  each  of 
them  a  friend.  These  says  he,  are  my  dearest  <fe  best 
beloved  cousens,  for  whom  I  shall  ever  retain  the 
most  sincere  friendship.  Nothing  can  afford  me 
more  pleasure,  says  the  Emperor,  than  to  comply 
with  your  request. 

Elseon  took  an  affectionate  leave  of  the  Emperor 
A  on  the  second  day  after,  being  prepared  for  his 
journey  he  set  off  with  his  three  friends  <t  their  eerv- 
ants.  Moonrod,  prince  of  the  Empire,  &  Lamesa 
with  her  two  sisters,  with  each  of  them  a  friend, 
attended  them  on  his  journey  about  twenty  miles. 
They  all  tarried  at  a  vilage  over  night. 

Imagination  alone  can  paint  the  pleasant  <fe  happy 
scene.  Elseon  was  transported  with  joy.  He  prest 
her  to  his  bosom  with  all  the  ardor  of  inthusiasm,  <fc 
she  yielded  to  all  his  tender  &  innocent  embraces 
with  a  grateful  sensibility  &  modest  resignition. 

The  invention  &  ingenuity  of  Elseon  must  now 
be  employed  in  forming  a  plan  for  their  flight  to  his 
Fathers  dominions.  As  he  appeared  to  acquiesse  in 
the  decision  of  the  Emperor,  &  had  maintained  the 
same  cheerful  deportment,  none  were  suspicious  of 
his  design.  The  Emperor  &  the  whole  court  still 
manifested  toward  him  every  token  of  high  respect  & 
sincere  friendship.  Without  any  hesitation,  the 
Emperor  complied  with  his  request  that  his  dear 
cousins,  the  son  &  the  three  daughters  of  the 
Emperor,  with  each  of  them  a  friend,  should  accom 
pany  him  about  twenty  miles  on  his  return  to  Ken- 
tuck.  The  retinue  of  the  young  Prince  consisted  of 


92  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

four  of  his  most  intimate  friends  &  their  servants. 
He  took  care  to  send  their  baggage  on  by  two  serv 
ants  one  day  before  they  set  out.  The  morning 
arived,  the  sun  shone  with  radiant  splendor,  not  a 
cloud  intervened  or  was  seen  to  float  in  the  atmos 
phere.  It  was  the  fourth  day  after  Lamesa  had 
received  the  letters  which  doomed  her  to  the  embraces 
of  Sambul.  The  Emperor,  his  Counsellors,  his  Priests 
&  principal  officers  assembled,  &  having  invited  the 
young  prince  &  his  friends  to  meet  them,  they 
entered  the  circle  with  great  ceremony.  The  Em 
peror  then  addressed  the  Young  Prince,  thanked 
him  for  the  honour  of  his  viset  &  expressed  his  firm 
determination,  to  maintain  a  sincere  friendship  &  an 
inviolable  peace  with  the  government  of  Kentuck. 
Elseon  replied  that  the  whole  sentiments  would  meet 
the  cordial  approbation  of  his  Father,  who  retained 
the  same  sentiments  of  friendship  &  peace  toward 
the  government  of  Sciota.  He  then  thanked  the 
Emperor  &  the  whole  assembly  for  the  high  respect 
they  had  shown  him.  This  was  done  with  that  frank 
ness  &  apparent  sincerity  that  the  whole  assembly 
were  highly  pleased.  The  Emperor  then  embraced 
him  &  gave  him  his  blessing.  Customary  ceremonies 
were  mutually  exchanged  by  the  whole  company,  & 
even  tears  were  seen  to  drop  from  every  eye. 

As  the  whole  of  this  parade  indicates  no  flight  of 
Elseon  &  Lamesa,  we  must  now  view  them  with  their 
select  company  of  friends  setting  out  on  a  short 
journey.  All  mounted  on  horses,  they  rode  about 
twenty  miles  to  a  village  where  they  halted.  An  eli- 
gant  supper  was  provided,  they  were  chearful  & 


TUB  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  93 

sociable,  none  appeared  more  so,  that  Elseon  & 
Lamesa.  The  next  day  Elsean  requested  the  com 
pany  of  his  dear  cousens  a  short  distance  on  his 
journey.  When  they  had  rode  about  two  miles  they 
halted  &  proposed  to  take  their  leave  of  each  other 
Lamesa  &  her  friend,  without  being  perceived  by  the 
company  rode  on.  It  was  a  place  where  the  road 
turned,  &  by  riding  one  rod,  they  could  not  be  seen. 
The  rest  of  the  company  entered  into  a  short  con 
versation  &  passed  invitation  for  reciprocal  visets  <fc 
friendly  offices.  They  then  clasped  each  others 
hands  &  bowing  very  low,  took  an  affectionate  fare 
well.  But  where  are  Lamesa  &  her  friend?  During 
these  ceremonies  their  horses  move  with  uncommon 
swiftness,  her  heart  palpitates  with  an  apprehension 
that  she  might  be  overtaken  by  her  brother.  But 
now  a  friend  more  dear,  her  beloved  Elseon,  with  his 
companions,  outstrip  the  wind  in  their  speed.  & 
within  one  hour  &  half  they  overtake  these  fearful 
Damsels.  They  all  precipitate  their  course,  casting 
their  eyes  back  every  moment  to  no  purpose,  her 
pursuers.  But  pursuers  had  not  sufficient  time  to 
overtake  them.  They  safeijTarive  on~the  Bank  of 
the  Great  River.  Elseon  &  Lamesa  were  the  first 
that  entered  the  boat,  the  rest  follow.  &  such  was 
Klseons  engagedness  &  anxiety  to  secure  his  fair 
prize,  that  he  even  seized  an  oar  and  used  it  with 
great  strength  &  dexterity.  As  their  feet  stept  on  the 
opposite  shore,  Elseon  claspt  his  hands  <fc  spoke 
aloud,  Lamesa  is  mine.  She  is  now  beyond  the  grasp 
of  a  pompous  tyrant,  &  the  control  of  a  father  whose 
mind  is  blinded  by  the  sordid  advice  of  a  menial 


94  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

junto  of  counsellors  &  priests.  She  is  mine  &  shall 
soon  be  the  Princess  of  Kentuck.  Their  movement  is 
no  slow  thro'  the  remaining  part  of  their  journey. 
They  at  length  arive  at  the  great  City  of  Gamba. 
We  may  now  contemplate  them  as  having  new  scenes 
to  pass  thro*  Not  to  delineate  the  parade  which  was 
made  at  the  court  of  Hamboon,  for  the  reception  of 
his  son,  Lamesa,  &  their  friends,  or  to  describe  the 
joy  that  was  exhibited  in  every  part  of  the  city  on 
their  arival,  &  the  universal  surprize  occasioned  by 
the  story  of  the  flight  of  these  two  Lovers.  Suffice  it 
to  say,  that  those  who  beheld  Lamesa  did  not  blame 
Elseon. 

As  Hamboon  was  not  very  punctilious  in  his  regard 
for  the  constitution,  being  possessed  of  very  liberal 
sentiments,  Elseon  found  no  difficulty  in  obtaining 
his  consent  to  marry  Lamesa.  On  the  fourth  day 
after  their  arival,  Elseon  &  Lamesa,  with  each  of 
them  a  friend  appeared  on  a  stage,  which  was  erected 
on  the  public  square  of  the  City.  The  Emperor  & 
Empress  with  his  counsellors,  his  Priests  his  officers, 
&  all  his  relations,  with  the  -principal  Ladies  of  the 
City,  formed  a  procession  &  surrounded  the  stage. 
The  common  Citizens  being  a  great  multitude,  took 
their  stands  as  they  pleased.  The  Emperor  & 
Empress  then  mounted  the  stage,  &  united  Elseon  & 
Lamesa  in  the  bond  of  wedlock  according  to  custom. 
&  as  pulling  the  Log  was  an  indespensible  ceremony 
one  was  provided  with  a  rope  around  it  on  the  stage. 
The  Bridegroom  &  Bride  played  their  parts  in  pulling 
the  rope  with  such  dexterity  &  gracefulness,  that  the 
whole  assembly  was  most  pleasingly  entertained. 


THE  ''MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  95 

When  all  was  ended,  the  whole  assembly  clapetf  their 
hands  &  cried,  Long  live  Elseon  &  Lamesa.  &  giv 
ing  three  huzzas,  the  common  citizens  dispersed. 
The  rest  repaired  to  a  sumptuous  entertainment,  & 
spent  the  remaining  part  of  the  day  &  evening  in 
conversation,  singing  &  recreation. 

CHAP    XII. 

THE  reader  will  recollect  that  Elseon  A  his  friends 
left  Moonrod  &  his  friends  in  a  very  pleasant  mood 
without  the  least  suspicion,  that  Lamesa  &  her  friend 
had  deserted  them.  When  they  had  arrived  at  the 
vilage,  what  was  their  surprize  when  they  found  that 
Lamesa  &  her  friend  were  not  in  the  company,  nor 
had  any  one  any  recollection  of  her  being  in  com 
pany,  after  they  had  stopped  to  take  their  leave  of 
Elseon.  Moonrod  &  the  other  gentlemen  immediately 
rode  back  with  the  greatest  speed  to  the  place  where 
they  had  halted,  <fc  not  finding  any  traces  of  her 
Lamesa  the  conclusion  was  then  certain  that  she  had 
prefered  the  company  of  the  young  Prince  &  was  on 
her  \vay  to  Kentuck. 

Pursuit  would  be  in  vain.  Their  only  alternative 
was  to  hasten  back  to  carry  the  doleful  intelligence 
to  the  Emperor.  Their  speed  was  nearly  equal  to 
that  of  Elseon.  Without  waiting  to  perform  the  cus 
tomary  ceremony  of  entering  the  palace,  Moonrod 
immediately  rushed  into  the  Emperors  presence,  & 
exclaimed,  your  daughter  Lamesa  has  been  seduced 
by  Elseon  to  leave  our  company  unperceived,  &  has 
gone  with  him  to  Kentuck.  Nothing  but  the  pencil 


96  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

of  the  Limner,  could  paint  the  Astonishment  of  the 
Emperor.  He  rose,  stood  motionless  for  a  moment, 
then  staring  fiercely  on  Moonrod  he  spoke,  is  it  pos 
sible,  is  it  possible,  are  you  not  mistaken  my  Son.  I 
am  not,  says  he,  my  most  excellent  Father.  I  am 
not  mistaken.  This  morning  we  attended  Elseon  a 
small  distance  from  the  village  where  we  lodged. 
When  we  had  halted  to  take  our  leave  &  our  attention 
was  all  engaged  she  &  her  friend  she  &  her  friend 
rode  off  unperceived  by  any  of  our  company  nor  did 
we  miss  her  until  we  arived  again  at  the  vilage.  We 
have  made  full  search  &  enquiry,  &  find  that  she  has 
absolutely  gone  with  the  young  prince  to  Kentuck. 
What  an  ingrate  says  the  Emperor,  what  a  monster 
of  hipocrisy  Did  the  honourable  attention  we  have 
shown  him  demand  such  treatment?  How  has  he 
insulted  the  dignity  of  our  family  &  outraged  the 
high  authority  of  our  government.  This  affair  will 
demand  the  most  serious  consideration.  O  Lamesa, 
Lamesa,  my  darling  my  best  beloved  child,  was  it 
possible  for  you  to  be  so  deceived  by  that  artful 
prince,  was  it  possible  for  you  to  disobey  the  com 
mand  of  your  indulgent  father?  as  they  stept  on  the 
covering  top  of  the  canal,  the  thin  pieces  of  timber 
broke  &  they  all  plunged  in  &  found  themselves  in  an 
instant  at  the  bottom  of  the  canal.  Surprised  &  ter- 
rified  &  tliey  soon  found  themselves  in  no  situation  to 
vindicate  their  exclusive  right  to  wear  blue  feathers 
in  their  caps.  They  were  compleatly  in  the  power  of 
their  enimies  who  returned  quick  upon  them  They 
demanded  quarter  &  surrendered  themselves  pris- 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  97 

oners  of  war.  And  giving  up  their  arms,  their 
demand  was  granted.  In  the  meantime  a  party  of 
Soiotans  who  lay  in  ambuah,  on  the  side  of  the  Hill 
rushed  down  upon  the  reserved  corps  of  the  Ken- 
tucks,  who  being  filled  with  consternation  at  the 
direful  disaster  of  their  companions,  surrendered 
themselvs  prisoners  of  war  without  a  struggle. 
Thus  in  a  few  moments,  by  pursuing  the  stratigem  or 
plan  of  Lobaska,  An  army  of  thirty  Thousand  men 
were  captured,  <fe  the  pride  &  haughtiness  of  a  mighty 
Prince  was  humbled.  Not  a  drop  of  blood  was  shed 
to  accomplish  the  whole. 

&  bring  upon  our  family  such  wretchedness  <fc  dishon 
our.  Fame  with  Her  Thousand  tongues  commenced 
her  pleasing  employment,  &  as  swift  as  the  wings  of 
Time  she  wafted  the  inteligence  thro'  the  City  with 
many  distorted  &  exaggerated  particulars.  All  was 
astonishment  confusion  &  uproar.  Resentment 
enkindled  her  indignant  sparks  into  a  flame  &  the 
general  cry  was  revenge  &  war.  The  Sciotan  King 
was  walking  in  his  parlour,  feeding  his  imagination 
with  the  pleasing  prospect  of  his.  future  glory  & 
felicity.  I  am,  quoth  he  to  himself,  honoured  above 
all  the  other  princes  of  the  Empire,  <fc  even  above 
the  heair  apparent  to  the  imperial  crown  of  Kentuck. 
Who  could  be  admitted  except  myself  to  marry  this 
fair  Lamesa,  the  eldest  daughter  of  the  Emperor,  the 
most  amiable  the  most  accomplished  &  the  most  hon 
orable  Lady  in  the  universe.  This  is  a  distinction 
which  will  place  me  on  equal  ground  with  the 


98  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

Emperor  himself,  &  command  from  all  my  subjects 
the  homage  of  their  highest  respect  and  reverence. 
Besides  I  have  a  soul  that  can  relish  the  charms  of 
the  beautiful  maid.  She  will  adore  me  as  her  Lord  & 
think  herself  highly  honoured  &  exceeding  happy  to 
submit  to  my  most  endearing  &  affectionate 
embraces.  But  ah,  mighty  Sambul,  you  little 
tho't  how  soon  this  delightful  prospect  would  be 
reversed,  &  that  your  soul  would  be  filled  with 
chagrin  indignation  &  revenge.  A  messenger  burst 
into  his  parlour  &  announced  the  astonishing  tidings 
of  Lamesas  elopement.  She  had  absolutely  gone, 
says  he,  to  become  the  wife  of  Elseon,  &  the  empress 
of  Kentuck.  Not  the  wondrous  &  instantaneous 
roar  of  ten  Thousand  thunders  instantaneously 
thro*  the  atmosphere,  could  have  produced  greater 
surprise.  His  countanance  was  all  amazement  It  was 
for  a  moment  covered  with  paleness,  his  lips  quiv 
ered,  his  knees  smote  together  &  his  gigantic  body 
trembled  like  the  shaking  of  a  tower  under  the  effects 
of  an  earthquake.  But  soon  after  a  little  silent  his 
reflections  &  cogitations  caused  the  blood  to  return 
with  a  ten -fold  velocity  into  his  face,  it  assumed  the 
colour  of  redness  &  clinching  He  assumed  the  atti 
tude  of  terrific  majesty  &  poured  forth  his  feelings  in 
a  voice  more  terrible  than  the  roaring  of  a  volcano. 
How  have  I  been  abused,  dishonoured,  insulted  & 
outraged.  How  have  my  prospects  of  glory  been 
instantaneously  blasted  &  my  character,  my  character 
become  the  ridicule  of  a  laughing  world.  What 
felicities  of  enjoying  the  imperial  maid  in  my  arms, 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY.'1  99 

adoring  me  for  her  husband  are  now  vanished.  A  by 
whom  am  I  thus  disgraced  insulted  &  injured?  By 
the  mock  prince  of  Kentuck,  an  effeminate  stripling, 
a  cringing  &  plausible  Upstart.  He  has  robed  me 
of  the  fairest  orniment  of  my  kingdom,  sjhe  Lamesa, 
who  was  mine  by  solemn  contract,  &  must  he  now 
revel  in  her  charms  which  are  mine,  &  pride  himself 
in  those  deceitful  arts  by  which  he  has  seduced  her, 
&  stolen  her  from  my  enjoyment?  No,  ungrateful  & 
insidious  monster,  your  triumph  shall  be  of  short 
duration,  &  this  arm  shall  viset  your  crimes  upon 
your  head  with  a  ten -fold  vengence.  Having  poured 
forth  a  torrent  of  the  most  dreadful  imprecations  & 
menaces,  he  left  his  parlour  &  walked  forth  to  consult 
his  principal  officers  on  the  best  plan  to  obtain 
revenge. 

In  the  meantime  the  Emperor,  less  haughty  & 
indignant,  &  possessed  of  sentiments  more  humane 
&  benelent,  sent  an  invitation  to  his  Counsellors  to 
attend  him.  They  were  unanimous  in  the  opinion 
that  the  offense  of  Elseon  required  reparation.  But 
should  war  be  the  consequence,  if  he  refused  to 
return  Lamesa?  On  this  question,  two  of  the  coun 
sellors  contended  that  an  humble  recantation  would 
repair  the  injury  done  to  the  honour  of  the  imperial 
family,  &  the  authority  of  the  government.  The 
other  two  insisted  that  they  should  demand  in  addi- 
tion  that  would  not  be  sufficient  But  that  they  should 
demand  in  addition  ten  Mammouth  which  would  be 
an  adequate  compensation,  but  they  all  depreciated 
the  horrors  of  war.  In  the  midst  of  their  debetea 
which  were  managed  with  great  coolness  &  imparti- 


100  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

ality,  Sambul  presented  himself.  I  have  come  forward 
says  he,  may  it  please  your  most  excellent  majesty, 
to  demand  the  fulfillment  of  that  solemn  contract, 
which  you  made  to  deliver  me  your  eldest  daughter 
in  marriage.  She  has  been  surreptitiously  carried 
off  by  the  young  prince  of  Kentuck.  She  is  mine  by 
contract  &  your  majesty  is  bound  to  deliver  her  to  me. 
I  demand  Let  her  be  immediately  demanded,  &  if  the 
Emperor  the  father  of  the  young  prince  shall  refuse 
to  return  her,  this  will  implicate  him  in  the  same  crime 
&  be  a  sufficient  cause  of  war.  In  that  case  war  will 
be  indespensible  to  vindicate  the  honour  of  our 
respective  crowns,  &  the  rights  of  the  Empire.  I 
should  then  give  my  voice  for  war,  &  would  then 
never  sheathe  my  sword  until  the  torrents  of  blood 
had  made  expiation  for  the  ingratitude  baseness  & 
perfidy  of  the  young  Princy.  An  humble  recanta 
tion  or  the  delivery  of  ten  mammouth,  would  this  be 
a  sufficient  reparation  for  such  an  offense  so  flagi 
tious?  No,  the  very  proposal  would  be  an  insult  on 
the  dignity  of  our  government.  Can  anything  short 
of  the  repossession  of  the  fair  object  stolen,  of  the 
invaluable  prize  felonously  taken  from  us,  be  an 
adequate  compensation?  Nothing  short  of  this  can 
heal  our  bleeding  honour,  appease  the  indignation 
of  our  subjects,  &  reinstate  friendship  &  and  an  ami 
cable  intercouse,  between  both  Empires.  Let  this  be 
your  demand  that  Lamesa  shall  be  returned.  Let  a 
refusal  be  followed  by  an  immediate  declaration  of 
war,  Let  the  resources  &  energies  of  the  nation  be 
called  forth.  Assemble  your  armies  &  pour  destruc 
tion  upon  all  who  shall  oppose  the  execution  of  our 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY.'1  101 

revenge.  I  myself  will  lead  the  van  A  mingle  my  arm 
with  those  who  fight  the  most  bloody  battles. .  Heroes 
shall  fall  before  us,  their  towns  shall  be  laid  in  ruins, 
&  carnage  shall  glut  our  indignant  Swords. 

When  further  deliberation  had  taken  place,  the 
Emperor  &  two  of  his  counsellors  adopted  the  advice 
of  Sambul  to  demand  Lamesa  <fc  an  envoy  was 
immediately  "dispatched  to  the  Emperor  of  Kentuck 
with  the  following  Letter. 

May  it  please  your  most  gracious  majesty.  Noth 
ing  could  have  given  us  more  pleasure  than  the  dis 
position  you  manifested  in  sending  Elseon,  the  heir 
apparent  to  your  crown  to  viset  our  family.  We 
treated  him  as  our  dearest  Cousen  <fc  as  our  most 
intimate  friend.  He  was  invited  to  associate  with  our 
children,  <fc  to  consider  himself  whilst  he  tarried  as  a 
member  of  our  family.  Such  being  the  confidence 
we  placed  in  his  rectitude  &  honour,  that  he  assumed 
the  liberty  to  contract  the  most  intimate  acquaint 
ance  with  Lamesa,  our  eldest  daughter.  This  pro 
duced  an  agreement  between  them,  that  with  our 
consent  they  would  be  united  in  marriage.  Nothing 
could  have  been  more  pleasing  than  such  a  connec 
tion.  But  we  found  that  it  would  be  a  most  flagrant 
violation  of  the  true  meaning  &  spirit  of  our  constitu 
tion,  &  an  impious  outrage  on  the  memory  of  its 
great  founder.  For  these  reasons,  we  signified  our 
pleasure  that  Elseon  would  not  insist  on  our  com 
pliance  with  his  request.  He  appeared  to  acquiesse 
in  our  decision.  &  we  afterwards  contracted  with 
Sambul,  King  of  Sciota  to  give  her  in  marriage  to 
him. 


102  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY.1' 

But  the  after  conduct  of  your  son,  may  it  please 
your  most  gracious  majesty,  did  not  correspond  with 
the  high  confidence  we  placed  in  him.  With  deep 
regret  &  the  most  painful  sensations  we  are  compeled 
to  declare  that  he  has  committed  a  crime  which  has 
disturbed  our  peace  &  happiness,  dishonoured  our 
family  &  outraged  the  authority  of  our  government, 
&  the  rights  of  our  Empire.  He  has  formed  a  plan 
to  transport  Lamesa  into  your  dominions.  To  accom 
plish  this,  he  made  use  of  the  most  insidious  arts, 
He  took  advantage  of  our  clemency  &  indescretion, 
&  the  high  respect  we  manifested  toward  him,  & 
without  our  consent  &  contrary  to  our  will,  he  has 
succeeded  in  transporting  to  the  City  of  Gamba. 
in  his  perfidious  design.  Lamesa  is  doubtless  with 
you  in  the  City  of  Gamba.  A  crime  which  of  such 
malignity,  committed  against  the  honour  &  interest  & 
dignity  of  our  family  government  &  Empire  demands 
reparation.  Your  majesty  will  perceive  that  the  only 
adequate  reparation  which  can  be  made,  will  be  the 
return  of  Lamesa  to  our  dominions.  We  therefore 
demand  that  she  be  conveyed  back  with  all  possible 
expidition. 

No  other  alternative  can  prevent  the  interruption 
of  that  confidence  friendship  &  peace,  which  have 
long  continued  between  both  Empires,  &  save  them 
from  the  horrors  &  calamities  of  war. 

Signed.    RAMBOCK,  EMPEROR  OF  SCIOTA. 

When  Hamboon  had  received  this  letter,  he  imme 
diately  invited  his  counsellors  to  attend  him,  &  laid 
it  before  them,  &  as  it  was  a  subject  of  vast  impor- 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  103 

tance  to  the  Empire,  he  likewise  invited  his  priests  & 
principal  officers  to  join  them  in  council.  The  vari 
ous  passions  appeared  to  operate  in  the  course  of 
their  consultation.  To  avoid  Hostilities,  with  all  its 
attendant  calamities,  was  what  they  most  ardently 
desired,  &  some  contended  that  if  no  other  alterna 
tive  could  be  agreed  upon,  it  would  be  for  the  inter 
est  of  the  Empire  &  the  best  policy  to  return  the 
princess,  but  others  reprobated  this  measure  as 
pusilanimous,  &  cowardly  &  advised  if  no  other  repa 
ration  would  be  received,  to  retain  the  princess  & 
maintain  the  conflict  with  a  manly  &  heroic  firmness. 
What,  say  they,  do  not  honour  &  justice  require  that 
we  should  defend  the  rights  of  the  imperial  family? 
If  the  Sciotan  government  should  demand  that  we 
should  send  them  our  Emperor  or  Empress,  would 
not  honour  impel  us  to  spurn  at  the  demand,  &  reject 
it  with  indignation?  Their  present  demand  is  as  pre 
posterous  &  as  insulting.  No  satisfaction  will  they 
receive  for  the  supposed  injury,  except  that  we 
should  seize  the  Princess  of  the  Empire,  tare  her 
from  the  bosom  of  her  consort  &  transport  her  to 
Sciota.  Are  we  capable  of  an  act  so  unjust  &  inhu 
man,  so  base  &  disgraceful?  As  the  debate  was  pro 
ceeding  Elseon  rose.  May  I  says  he— claim  your 
attention  a  moment.  Undaunted  by  the  cruel 
demand  <fc  haughty  menace  of  the  Sciotan  govern 
ment,  I  am  willing  to  abide  your  decision.  If  trans 
porting  Lamesa  into  our  dominions  when  she  had 
been  most  unjustly  &  inhumanly  denied  me  for  a 
companion,  is  a  crime  so  perfidious  <fc  flagitious  as  of 
such  magnitude,  then  inflict  a  punishment  that  shall 


104  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

be  adequate  to  the  offense.  But  if  the  Almighty, 
whose  benevolence  is  infinite,  has  designed  the  union 
of  hands  where  hearts  are  united,  I  have  then  trans 
gressed  no  divine  law,  but  have  obeyed  the  divine 
will.  I  am  therefore  innocent  of  any  crime.  I  have 
an  undoubted  right  to  retain  Lamesa  for  my  wife,  & 
no  government  on  earth  have  any  authority  from 
heaven  to  tear  her  from  my  bosom.  Nor  will  I  sub 
mit  to  such  an  event,  so  long  as  the  life  blood  circu 
lates  thro*  my  heart  &  warms  my  limbs.  If  war  must 
be  the  consequence  of  my  proceedings,  which  trans 
gressed  no  principle  of  honour  justice  or  humanity, 
were  both  innocent  <fc  honourable,  it  will  give  me  the 
most  painful  feelings.  I  shall  deplore  its  calamities, 
but  will  never  shrink  like  a  Dastard  from  the  conflict. 
The  Sciotan  King,  who  is  at  the  bottom  of  all  the 
mischief  shall  never  behold  me  fleeing  before  his 
gigantic  sword,  or  skulking  to  avoid  a  single  combat 
with  him.  You  have  therefore  no  other  alternative 
but  either  first  to  slay  your  prince,  &  then  like 
cowards  to  send  back  your  princess  to  Sciota,  or  else 
to  make  immediate  preparations  to  meet  their  threat 
ened  vengeance,  with  fortitude  &  courage. 

This  speach  of  the  young  prince  united  the  whole 
council.  &  they  unanimously  agreed  to  reject  the 
demand  of  the  Sciotan  government.  A  letter  was 
written  &  an  Envoy  dispatched,  with  instructions  to 
attempt  a  reconciliation.  He  precipitated  his  journey 
to  the  court  of  Rambock,  &  when  he  arrived,  he 
delivered  him  the  following  letter. 

May  it  please  your  most  excellent  Majesty.     Next 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  105 

to  the  welfare  &  prosperity  of  our  Empire,  we  should 
rejoice  in  the  welfare  A  prosperity  of  yours.  It  is 
therefore  with  extreme  regret  that  we  view  the 
unhappy  difference,  which  has  arisen  A  which  threat 
ens  to  involve  the  two  Empires  in  the  calamities  of 
war. 

Had  you  demanded  a  reparation  for  the  supposed 
injury  which  which  would  consist  with  the  principles 
of  justice  A  the  honour  of  our  crown  &  government,  it 
should  be  given  you  with  the  utmost  cheerfulness. 
But  to  return  you  Lamesa,  who  has  now  become  the 
princess  of  Kentuck,  would  be  tearing  her  from  the 
arms  of  an  affectionate  husband  A  breaking  the  bond 
of  solemn  wedlock.  As  the  compliance  with  your 
demand,  will  subject  us  to  the  commission  of  such  an 
injustice  A  cruelty,  it  must  therefore  be  our  duty  to 
declare  that  we  will  not  return  the  young  princess.  A 
as  such  an  event  would  destroy  her  happiness  as  well 
as  that  of  her  affectionate  consort,  we  shall  permit  her 
to  tarry  in  our  dominions  A  grant  her  protection.  We 
are  however  desirous  that  an  honourable  reconcilia 
tion  may  take  place,  &  a  good  understanding  be 
restored.  To  effect  this  most  important  A  very  desir 
able  object,  we  have  given  full  authority  to  Labanko 
our  beloved  brother,  the  bearer  of  this  Letter,  to 
negotiate  a  settlement  of  our  difference,  provided 
you  will  receive  anything  as  a  substitute  for  what 
the  object  you  have  demanded. 

Signed.    HAMBOON,  EMPEROR  OP  KENTUCK. 

The  mind  of  Rambock  was  not  formed  for  the  per 
petual  exercise  of  resentment,  A  malice,  A  having 
conversed  a  considerable  time  with  Labanco,  who 


106  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

apologized  for  the  conduct  of  the  young  prince  with 
great  ingenuity  his  anger  abated  &  he  felt  a  disposi 
tion  for  the  negotiation  of  friendship.  But  the  indig 
nation  &  malice  of  Sambul  encreased  with  time,  his 
dark  soul  thirsted  more  ardently  for  revenge,  &  noth 
ing  would  satisfy  but  blood  &  carnage.  He  employed 
instruments  to  assist  in  faning  the  spark  of  resent 
ment,  &  blowing  them  into  the  flames  of  war.  Not 
content  to  represent  facts  as  they  existed,  &  in  their 
true  colours,  monstrous  stories  were  fabricated  &  put 
in  circulation,  calculated  to  excite  prejudice  &  rouse 
the  resentment  of  the  people  against  Elseon,  &  the 
whole  Empire  of  Kentuck.  He  had  recourse  to  a 
class  of  men  who  were  denominated  prophets  &  con 
jurors  to  favour  his  designs.  They  had  for  many 
ages  a  commanding  influence  on  the  minds  of  a  great 
majority  of  the  people.  As  they  pretended  to 
understand,  have  art  of  investigating  the  councils  & 
designs  of  the  heavenly  Hierarchy,  &  to  have 
a  knowledge  of  future  events,  the  people  listened 
with  pleasure  to  their  representations,  predictions  & 
tho't  it  impious  to  question  or  doubt  their  fulfilment 
A  small  company  of  these  necromanceers  or  juglers 
assembled  on  the  great  square  of  the  City,  &  mounted 
a  stage  which  was  provided  for  them.  The  citizens 
attended  It  was  a  prodigious  concourse  of  all  classes 
of  citizens  The  of  all  descriptions  both  wise  &  simple, 
both  male  &  female.  They  surrounded  the  stage  & 
were  all  attention.  All  anxious  to  learn  the  decrees 
of  heaven,  &  the  future  destinies  of  the  Empire. 
Drofalick,  their  chief  prophet  extended  his  arms  & 
cast  up  his  eyes  to -Heaven.  Quoth  he,  Heaven 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  107 

unfolds  her  massy  gates,  &  opens  to  my  view  a  pros 
pect  wide  &  vast.     The  seven  sons  of  the  great  Spirit 
seize  their  glittering  swords,  &  swear  that  they  shall 
not  be  sheathed  till  blood  in  torrents  run  &  deluge 
the  fair  land  of  Kentuck  I  behold  armies  martialing 
on  the  celestial  plain,  &  hear  warriors  4  heroes  cry, 
Avenge  the  crime  of  Elseon.    I  hear  a  thundering, 
voice  proceeding  from  the  great  throne  of  him  who 
rules  the  world,  proclaiming  thus,  Corn   shall  not 
grow  in  the  Sciotan  fields  nor  mammouth  yield  their 
milk,  nor  fish  be  taken  in  the  snare  but  pestilence 
shall  roam,  unless  Sciota  shall  avenge  the  crime  of 
Elseon.      Drofalick  ended  his   prophesy.      Hamaok 
then  arose  &  in  his  hand  he  held  a  stone  which  he 
pronounced  transparent.      Thro'  this  he  could  view 
things  present  &  things  to  come,  could  behold  the 
dark  intriques  &  cabals  of  foreign  courts,  A  behold 
discover  hidden  treasures,  secluded  from  the  eyes  of 
other  mortals.     He  could  behold  the  galant  A  his 
mistress  in  their  bedchamber,  &  count  all  their  moles 
warts   &  pimples.      Such  was   the  clearness   of  his 
sight,  when  this  transparent  stone  was  placed  before 
his   eyes.      He  looked  firmly   &  steadfastly  on   the 
stone  &  raised  his  prophetick  voice.     I  behold  Ham- 
boon  with  all  his  priests  &  great  officers  assembled 
around  him  "With   what    contempt    he  declares    he 
despises  all  the  Sciotans.     They  are,  says  he,  cow 
ards   &  poltroons.      They  dare  not  face   my  brave 
warriors.     Here  I  see  four  men  coming  forward  bear 
ing  an  image,  formed  with  all  the  fetures  of  ugliness 
&  deformity.     This  they  called  Sambul  the  King  of 
Sciota,  the  whole  company  break  forth  into  boister- 


108  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

ous  Laughing.  Ah,  see  &  they  are  outing  off  his 
head  with  their  swords.  Yes,  &  are  now  kicking  it 
about  the  palace.  Here  is  a  pole,  it  is  stuck  upon 
that  &  carried  thro'  the  City.  Oh  my  loving  sparks, 
Elseon  &  Lamesa,  what  makes  you  so  merry?  Why 
Elseon  says  he  has  outwitted  the  Sciotans,  he  has 
got  the  prize  &  he  little  regards  their  resentment. 
Hamack  was  proceeding  with  such  nonsensical  vis 
ions,  when  the  whole  multitude  interrupted  him  with 
a  cry,  Revenge,  Revenge,  "We  will  convince  the 
Kentuckans  that  we  are  not  cowards  or  poltroons. 
Their  heads  shall  pay  for  their  sport  in  kicking 
about  the  pretended  head  the  head  of  our  pretended 
beloved  King  We  will  avenge  the  crime  of  Elseon. 
The  great  &  good  Being  is  on  our  side  &  threatens  us 
with  famine  &  pestilence,  unless  we  avenge  the  crime 
of  Elseon. 

The  arts  of  the  Conjurers  were  the  consummation 
of  Sambuls  plan  to  produce  in  the  minds  of  the  mul 
titude  an  enthusiasm  &  rage  for  war.  He  now  repairs 
to  the  Emperor  &  solicits  him  to  assemble  his  coun 
sellors  immediately,  proclaim  war  &  concert  measures 
for  its  prosecution.  The  Emperor  replies  that  they 
should  soon  be  assembled,  but  as  to  war,  it  was  a 
subject  which  reguired  great  consideration. 

Early  on  the  next  day  his  counsellors -priests  & 
principal  officers  met  him  in  the  council  room.  He 
laid  before  them  the  Letter  of  Hamboon,  &  added 
observed  that  tho*  the  government  of  Kentuck  had 
refused  to  return  Lamesa,  yet  they  had  offered  to 
make  to  our  government  a  recantation,  for  Elseon's 
crime,  <fe  to  pay  us  almost  any  sum  as  a  reparation 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  109 

for  our  injury.     The  council  sat  silent  for  some  time. 
At  length  the  venerable  Boakim  arose. 

I  must  beg,  says  he,  the  indulgence  of  your 
majesty,  <fe  this  honourable  council  for  a  few 
moments.  Never  did  I  rise  with  such  impressions 
of  the  high  importance  of  our  deliberations,  as  what 
I  now  feel.  The  great  question  to  be  decided,  is 
peace  or  war.  If  peace  can  be  preserved  with  honour, 
then  let  us  maintain  peace,  but  if  not,  let  us  meet  war 
with  fortitude  &  courage. 

As  to  the  great  Crime  of  Elseon,  no  one  presumes 
to  present  an  apoligy.  Even  their  own  government 
acknowledge  that  he  had  been  guilty  of  a  great 
Crime.  But  is  it  of  such  malignity  as  to  require  the 
conflagration  of  towns,  &  cities  &  the  lives  of  milions 
to  make  an  expiation?  Can  no  other  reparation  con 
sistent  with  justice  and  humanity  be  received?  Or 
must  we  compel  in  order  to  have  an  atonement  made 
for  the  crime  of  Elseon  compel  the  government  of 
Kentuck  to  commit  another  crime  to  separate,  to  tear 
from  each  others  embrace  the  husband  &  wife?  Such 
a  reparation  as  this,  we  cannot  in  justice  expect. 
Shall  we  then  accept  of  no  other?  Cannot  our  bleed 
ing  honour  be  healed  without  sheding  blood  without 
laying  a  whole  Empire  in  ruins?  Such  refined  notions 
of  honour  may  prove  our  own  ruin,  as  well  as  the 
ruin  of  those  on  whom  we  attempt  to  execute  our 
vengence  The  calamities  of  war  have  a  reciprocal 
action  on  the  parties.  Each  must  expect  to  endure  a 
portion  of  evils,  how  large  a  portion  would  fall  to  our 
share  in  case  of  war,  it  is  not  for  us  to  determine. 
While  thirsting  for  revenge,  we  contemplate  with 


110  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

infinite  pleasure,  their  armies  routed,  &  their  warriors 
bleeding  under  our  swords  their  women  helpless  & 
children  expiring  by  thousands,  &  their  country  in 
flames.  But  reverse  the  scene.  Suppose  the  enimy 
have  as  much  wit,  as  much  stratagim,  courage, 
strength  &  inhumanity  as  what  we  you  possess,  & 
such  may  be  your  situation.  When  the  floodgate  is 
once  opened,  who  can  stop  the  torrent,  &  prevent 
devastation  &  ruin.  We  ought  therefore  It  was  never 
designed  by  the  great  &  good  Being  that  his  children 
should  contend,  &  destroy  that  existence  which  he 
gave  them,  they  all  have  equal  rights  &  ought  to 
strive  to  maintain  peace  &  friendship.  This  has  been 
the  maxim  of  our  fathers  &  this  the  doctrine  taught 
by  the  great  Founder  of  our  government  &  religion. 
Under  the  influence  of  this  maxim,  our  nation  has 
grown  to  an  emence  multitude,  &  contentment  &  hap 
piness  have  been  universal.  But  why  can  we  not 
enjoy  peace  with  honour?  What  insurmountable 
obsticles  are  there  to  prevent?  Why  truely  a  recan 
tation  & — (word  illegible) — are  no  compensation  for 
the  injury?  For  other  offenses  these  are  accepted, 
&  why  must  the  offense  of  Elseon  be  singular? 

The  Emperors  daughter  we  presume  is  happy,  nor 
can  it  be  a  disgrace  to  the  imperial  family  that  she 
has  married  the  son  of  an  emperor,  the  heir  apparent 
to  his  crown.  But  she  wasjo  have  been  the  wife  of 
Sambui,  the  King  of  Sciota  We  can  therefore  with 
honour  to  our  government  accept  the  reparation 
offered.  &  thus  preserve  the  blessings  of  peace. 
But  if  we  suffer  resentment,  pride  &  ambition  to 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  ill 

plunge  us  into  a  war,  where  will  its  mischiefs,  where 
will  its  miseries  end?  As  to  both  empires  are  nearly 
equal  as  to  numbers  &  resources,  I  will  venture  to 
predict  their  eventual  overthrow  &  destruction. 

Boakim  would  have  proceeded,  but  Hamkol  rose  & 
interrupted.  It  was  impudence  in  the  extreme,  but 
he  had  much  brass  &  strong  lungs,  &  could  be  heard 
further  than  Boakim 

"Such  sentiments,  says  he,  may  comport  with  the 
infirmities  of  age,  but  they  are  too  degrading  &  cow 
ardly  for  the  vigor  of  youth  &  manhood.  If  we  suffer 
insult,  perfidy  &  outrage  to  pass  with  impunity,  we 
may  afterwards  bend  our  necks  to  be  trodden  upon 
by  every  puny  upstart,  and  finical  coxcomb.  No. 
Let  us  march  with  our  brave  warriors  into  the  domin 
ion  of  Hamboon.  This  effeminate  &  luxurious  Court 
will  tremble  at  our  presence  &  yield  the  fair  Lamesa 
unto  our  possession.  But  if  they  should  still  have  the 
temerity  to  refuse,  we  will  then  display  our  valour  by 
inflicting  upon  them  a  punishment,  which  their  crimes 
deserve.  Yes,  our  valiant  heroes  shall  gain  immortal 
renown  by  their  heroic  exploits.  &  by  the  destruction 
of  all  shall  who  Sciota  will  ever  after  have  the  pre 
eminence  over  Kentuck,  &  compel  her  haughty  sons 
to  bow  in  our  presence.  Let  war  be  proclaimed.  & 
every  kingdom  &  tribe  from  the  River  to  the  Lakes 
will  pour  forth  their  warriors,  anxious  to  avenge  our 
countrys  wrongs.  Scarce  had  he  done  speaking. 
And  Lakoonrod,  the  High  Priest  arose.  He  was  in 
the  interest  of  Sambul  &  had  married  his  sister.  He 
had  taken  great  umbrage  at  Elseon,  for  saying  that 


112  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY.1' 

the  priesthood  had  too  great  an  assendency  at  the 
court  of  Hambock.  And  lifting  up  his  sanctimoneous 
eyes  slowly  toward  heaven,  &  extending  his  right 
reverand  hand  a  little  above  an  horizontal  position  he 
spoke. 

When  the  laws  which  are  contained  in  our  holy 
religion  are  transgressed,  it  is  my  duty  as  High 
Priest  of  the  Empire  to  give  my  testimony  against 
the  transgression.  Elseon,  the  heir  apparent  to 
the  imperial  throne  of  Kentuck  has  been  guilty  of 
Robery  &  impiety  within  our  dominions.  He  has 
robed  this  Empire  of  an  invaluable  treasure,  &  as 
his  crime  is  a  most  flagicious  transgression  of  our 
divine  law  it  must  have  been  committed  in  defiance 
of  the  high  authority  of  heaven,  therefore  it  is  an 
act  of  the  greatest  impiety.  The  injury  the  insult 
&  the  outrage  has  not  been  committed  against  us 
alone,  if  this  was  the  case,  perhaps  we  might  accept 
of  reparation;  but  it  is  committed  against  the  throne 
of  Omnipotence  &  in  defiance  of  his  authority.  No 
reparation  can  of  consequence  be  received,  except  it 
be  a  return  of  the  stolen  treasure,  or  the  Blood  of 
the  Transgressor.  Nothing  else  can  satisfy  the 
righteous  demand  of  the  Great  and  good  Being.  He 
therefore  calls  upon  the  civil  power  to  execute  his 
vengeance,  to  inflict  an  exempleary  punishment.  And 
as  it  is  his  cause  &  you  are  imployed  as  his  instru 
ments,  you  may  be  assured  that  his  almighty  arm  will 
add  strength  to  your  exertions,  &  give  you  a  glori 
ous  victory  over  your  enimies.  The  mighty  atchieve- 
ments  of  your  warriors  shall  immortalize  their  names, 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  113 

&  their  heads  shall  be  crowned  with  never  fading 
laurels.  &  as  for  those  who  shall  die,  gloriously 
fighting  in  the  cause  of  their  country  &  their  God, 
they  shall  immediately  receive  etherial  bodies,  & 
shall  arise  quickly  to  the  abodes  of  increasing 
delight  and  glory. 

He  said  no  more.  He  had  discharged  some  part 
of  his  malice  against  Elseon,  for  saing  that  the 
priesthood  had  too  much  influence  in  the  court  of 
Rambock.  The  door  was  now  opened  &  it  was  seen 
that  Sambul  at  the  head  of  a  great  multitude  of 
citizens,  had  taken  their  stand  in  front  of  the  house, 
all  crying  with  a  loud  voice,  Revenge  &  war.  Long 
live  the  Emperor  &  King.  We  will  avenge  their 
wrongs.  This  uproar  &  the  harang  of  the  high 
Priest  determined  the  wavering  mind  of  the  Em 
peror.  But  the  venerable  Boakim  <fc  Bilhawa 
opposed~the  torrent  &  stood  as  stood  firm  They 
boldly  affirmed  that  a  war  was  impolitic  &  unjuBtifi- 
abe  But  the  Their  opposition  however,  was  in  vain. 
The  popular  voice  was  against  them  &  the  other  two 
counsellors  Hamkal  &  Gammaok  gave  their  vote  for 
war  urged  with  great  vehemence  that  war  should  be 
declared. 

In  vain  were  all  the  reasonings  of  the  venerable 
Boakim  &  Bilhawan.  The  other  two  counsellors, 
Hamkol  &  Gamanko  joining  the  Emperor,  they  pro 
ceeded  to  made  out  a  declaration  of  war.  It  was  in 
these  words. 

War  is  declared  by  the  government  &  Empire  of 
Sciota  against  the  government  &  Empire  of  Ken- 


124  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

tuck.  The  Sciotans  are  required  to  exterminate  with 
distinction  of  age  or  sex  all  the  inhabitants  of  the 
Empire  of  Kentuck.  They  are  required  to  burn  their 
houses  &  either  to  destroy  or  take  possession  of  their 
property,  for  their  own  use  &  benefit.  This  des 
truction  is  demanded  by  the  great  benevolent  Spirit 
&  the  Empire  government  of  Sciota 

Signed.  RAMBOCK  EMPEROR  OF  SCIOTA. 
A  copy  of  this  declaration  was  given  to  Labanco 
the  brother  &  Envoy  of  Hamboon.  He  demanded  a 
guard  to  defend  him  against  the  rage  of  the  common 
people,  who  discovered  a  disposition  to  plunge  their 
swords  into  the  heart  of  every  man  whose  fortune  it 
was  to  be  born  on  the  other  side  of  the  River. 
Labanco  was  guarded  as  far  as  the  River  &  con 
veyed  across  in  safety.  He  repaired  to  Gamba 
&  there  he  proclaimed  the  intelligence  of  the  declara 
tion  of  War  &  there  made  known  all  the  proceedings 
of  the  Sciotan  government. 
Fond  Parents 

I  have  received  two  letters  the  10th  jan 
1812  the  last  mentioned  Mr.  Kings  dismission  from 
you,  wich  no  doubt  is  great  trial  to  you  Christian 
Minister  is  great  loss  to  any  to  any  people  -  -  -  - 
teaches  us  the  uncertainty  of  all  sublinary  enjoy 
ments  &  where  to  place  our  better  trust  &  happiness 
NOTE  OF  COPYIST.— The  above  fragment  of  a  letter  is  all 

that  appears  on   page  132,  after  which  the  next  leaf,  pp. 

133-4,  is  missing.    The  narrative  then  goes  on  thus. 

Hambolan,  King  of  Chiauga  was  the  next  proud  chief 
who  appeared  at  Tolanga,  with  a  chosen  band  of 
warriors.  He  had  fifteen  thousand  who  boasted  of 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  115 

superior  strength  A  ability.  Their  countanances 
were  fierce  &  bold,  being  true  indicators  of  their 
hearts  which  feared  no  danger.  They  were  always 
obedient  to  the  orders  of  their  king,  who  always 
sought  the  most  conspicuous  place  for  the  display  of 
his  valor.  Possessed  of  gigantic  strength  &  of  aston 
ishing  agility,  he  was  capable  of  performing  the  most 
brilliant  achievements,  which  would  almost  exceed 
belief  His  mind  was  uncultivated  by  science  &  his 
passions  were  subject  to  no  restraint.  His  resent 
ment  was  quick  &  fiery  &  his  anger  knew  no  bounds 
for  expression  Nothing  was  concealed  in  his  heart, 
whether  friendship  or  enmity,  but  always  exhibited 
by  expressions  by  expressions  strong  &  extravagant. 
He  had  a  soul  formed  for  war.  In  the  bustle  of  the 
campaign  in  the  sanguine  field  where  heroes  fell, 
beneath  his  conquering  sword  his  ambition  was  grati 
fied  &  he  acquired  the  highest  martial  glory. 

Ulipoon  King  of  Michegan  received  the  orders  of 
the  Emperor  twith  with  great  joy  War  suited  his  nig- 
ardly  &  avaricious  soul,  as  he  was  in  hopes  to 
obtain  great  riches  from  the  spoils  of  the  enimy. 
Little  did  he  regard  the  miseries  &  destruction  of 
others,  if  by  this  means  he  oould  obtain  wealth  & 
agrandize  himself.  A  mind  so  contracted  &  selfish, 
was  not  capable  of  imbibing  one  sentiment  of  gen 
erosity  or  humanity  or  even  of  honour.  None 
however,  were  more  boisterous  than  he  for  war. 
None  proclaimed  their  own  valour  with  so  loud 
a  voice.  Yet  none  were  more  destitute  of  courage  & 
more  capable  of  treachery,  baseness  &  cruelty.  Yet 


116  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

with  the  sounding  epithets  of  patriotism,  honour  & 
valour,  he  proceeded  with  great  expedition  to  collect 
a  chosen  band,  of  dauntless  warriors  the  consisted  of 
Eighteen  thousand  warriors.  Their  martial  appear 
ance  entitled  them  to  a  commanded  of  more  gener 
osity  &  valour  than  the  nigardly  <fc  treacherous 
Ulipoon. 

Nemapon,  the  King  of  Cataraugus  made  no  was 
prompt  to  comply  with  the  imperial  requisition. 
Tho'  he  prefered  the  scenes  of  peace  &  being  very 
fond  of  study  &  of  the  mechanical  arts,  his  mind 
was  replenished  with  knowledge  db  &  he  took 
great  pleasure  in  promoting  works  of  inge 
nuity.  He  was  famed  for  great  wisdom  &  subtlety- 
penetration  of  mind,  was  capable  of  forming  great 
plans  &  of  prosecuting  them  with  great  vigour  &  per* 
severance.  He  was  deliberate  &  circumspect  in  all 
his  movements,  but  was  always  quick  on  any  sudden 
emergency,  to  concert  plans  &  to  determine,  had  the 
full  command  of  his  mental  powers  in  every  situa 
tion.  &  even  when  dangers  surrounded  him,  could 
instantly  determine  the  best  measures  to  be  pursued. 
He  prefered  the  scenes  of  peace,  but  could  meet  war 
with  courage  &  firmness.  At  the  head  of  a  select 
band  of  Seventeen  thousand  men,  all  compleatly 
armed  &  anxious  to  meet  the  foe,  he  marched  to  join 
the  grand  Army. 

Not  far  behind  appeared  Ramack,  the  King  of 
Geneseo.  "With  Furious  &  resolute,  he  had  made  the 
utmost  expidition  to  collect  his  forces.  Nor  did  he 
delay  a  moment  when  his  men  were  collected  &  pre- 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  127 

pared  to  move.  At  the  head  of  ten  Thousand  bold 
&  robust  wariors,  he  appeared  at  the  place  of  gen 
eral  rendezvoz,  within  one  day  after  the  King  of 
Cataraugus  had  arrived.  He  bosted  of  the  rapidity 
of  his  movements  &  tho  he  commanded  the  smallest 
division  of  the  grand  army,  yet  he  anticipated  dis 
tinguished  laurels  of  glory,  not  less  than  what  would 
be  obtained  by  their  first  commanders. 

When  these  kings  with  their  forces  had  all  arived 
at  Tolanga,  the  Emperor  Rambock  ordered  them  to 
parade  on  a  great  plain.  They  obeyed  &  and  were 
formed  in  solid  coilums.  The  Emperor  then  attended 
by  his  son  Moonrod,  his  Counsellors  &  the  high 
Priest  presented  himself  before  them.  His  garments 
glittered  with  ornaments,  &  a  bunch  of  long  feathers 
of  various  colours  were  placed  on  the  front  of  his 
cap.  His  sword  he  held  in  his  right  hand  &  being 
tall  <fc  straight  in  his  person,  &  having  a  countenance 
grave  &  bold,  when  he  walked  his  appearance  was 
majestic.  He  was  the  commander  in  chief  &  such 
was  the  high  esteem  <fc  reverence,  with  which  the 
whole  army  viewed  him,  that  none  were  considered 
so  worthy  of  that  station.  Taking  a  stand  in  front 
of  the  army  he  brandished  his  sword.  All  fixed  their 
eyes  upon  him  &  gave  profound  attention.  He  thus 
made  an  address. 

Brave  warriors.  It  is  with  the  greatest  satisfaction 
A  joy,  that  I  now  behold  you  assembled  to  revenge 
one  of  the  most  flagitious  Crimes  of  which  man  was 
ever  guilty.  Ingratitude  &  perfedy,  seduction  <fc 
Robery,  <fc  the  most  daring  impeity  against  heaven 
have  been  perpetrated,  within  our  dominions.  The 


118  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

young  Prince  of  Kentuck  is  the  monster  who  has 
been  guilty  of  these  Crimes.  Our  most  amiable 
daughter  Lamesa  he  has  seduced,  &  contrary  to  our 
will  has  transported  her  into  his  own  country.  Wish 
ing  to  avoid  the  effusion  of  human  blood,  we  offered 
to  withhold  our  revenge,  if  the  Emperor  of  Kentuck 
would  restore  our  daughter.  But  he  has  refused. 
He  has  implicated  himself  &  all  his  subjects  in  the 
horrid  Crimes  of  his  son.  Their  whole  land  is  now 
guilty  &  every  man  woman  &  child  are  the  proper 
objects  of  severe  chastisement.  The  great  &  Good 
Being  is  indignant  towards  them,  &  views  them  with 
the  utmost  detestation  &  abhorrence  As  we  have 
received  our  power  from  him  he  requires  that  we 
should  not  only  avenge  our  own  wrongs,  but  likewise 
execute  his  vengeance  on  the  perfidious  ingrates  & 
monsters  of  wickedness  &  impiety  That  this  is  his 
divine  will  has  been  clearly  investigated  by  our  holy 
prophets  &  priests,  who  have  given  us  the  most 
indubital  positive  assurance  that  success  shall  attend 
our  arms,  that  we  shall  be  enriched  with  the  plun 
der  of  our  enemies,  that  laurels  of  immortal  fame 
will  crown  the  achievements  of  our  warriors,  &  that 
they  shall  be  gloriously  distinguished  on  the  plains 
of  Glory,  like  suns  &  stars  in  the  firmement  of 
heaven.  Our  cause  is  just,  the  celestial  powers 
above  are  on  our  side,  they  have  brandished  theis 
swords  &  sworn  that  blood  shall  deluge  the  fair  land 
of  Kentuck.  You  have  done  well  my  Brave  warriors 
that  you  have  assembled  around  the  standard  of  your 
Emperor.  I  will  conduct  you  to  the  field  of  battle  & 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  3TORY."  119 

direct  your  movements.  My  son  Moonrod,  whose 
arm  like  mine  is  not  enfeebled  by  age,  will  mingle 
with  the  boldest  combatants  &  lead  you  on  to  victory. 
By  the  most  valorous  exploits  by  blood  <fc  slaughter, 
we  will  convince  our  enimies  that  we  are  not  cowards 
&  poltroons.  Their  ridicule  &  derision  shall  be  turned 
into  mourning  &  lamentation.  <fc  we  will  teach  their 
effeminate  &  luxurious  government  not  to  despise  the 
hardy  &  brave  sons  of  Sciota. 

In  full  confidence  that  we  shall  gloriously  triumph 
&  add  immortal  lustre  to  our  names,  we  will  now 
march  forward  we  will  &  avenge  the  injuries  done  to 
the  honour  of  our  imperial  government  &  the  rights 
of  our  Empire  &  all  the  celestial  beings  above  shall 
rejoice  in  the  execution  of  divine  vengeanoe. 

He  said  no  more.  The  whole  army  with  one  voice 
proclaimed  Long  live  the  Emperor.  We  swear  that 
he  shall  never  find  us  Cowards  <fc  Poltroons.  The 
Emperor  then  ordered  them  to  march  by  divisions  <fc 
each  king  to  lead  on  his  own  subjects.  They  began 
their  march  toward  the  land  of  Kentuck.  Their  pro 
visions  &  baggage  were  borne  on  the  backs  of  mam- 
mouth.  Each  man  had  a  sword  by  his  side  &  a  spear 
in  his  hand.  &  on  their  breasts  down  to  their  hips  <fc 
on  their  thighs  they  wore  peices  of  mammouth  skin 
to  guard  them  from  arrows  &  the  weapons  of  death. 
&  on  their  Caps  they  wore  bunches  of  long  feathers. 
Their  garments  were  short  so  as  not  to  encumber 
them  in  Battle.  Thus  equipped  A  mounted,  they 
moved  on  in  exact  order  until  they  arrived  at  the 
great  River.  Here  they  halted  to  provide  boats  to 
transport  them  across.  Their  baggage  <fe  provision 


120  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

were  borne  on  the  backs  of  their  mamm  mammouth, 
which  carried  prodigious  loads 

And  here  we  will  leave  them  for  the  present  dk  take 
a  view  of  the  proceedings  in  Kentuck. 

When  Labanco  had  presented  to  Hamboon  the 
Emperor  of  Kentuck  the  declaration  of  war  &  related 
the  proceedings  of  the  Sciotan  government  he  imme 
diately  assembled  his  counsellors  who  unanimously 
agreed  to  make  the  most  active  &  vigirous  prepara 
tions  for  war.  The  Emperor  sent  forth  his  mandates 
to  all  the  princes  of  his  Empire  requiring  them  to 
assemble  the  most  courageous  warriors,  in  their 
respective  kingdoms  &  to  march  to  the  City  of 
Gamba.  All  the  princes  of  the  Empire  were  quick  to 
obey  the  requisition  of  their  Sovereign.  The  army 
assembled  &  paraded  on  a  great  plain  before  the 
City.  Hamboon  attended  by  his  two  sons  Elseon  <fc 
Hanock,  &  by  his  counsellors  &  three  of  his  principal 
priests,  walked  out  of  the  city  &  presented  himself 
before  his  army. 

His  garments  were  of  various  colours  &  his  Cap 
was  adorned  with  a  bunch  of  beautiful  Feathers, 
which  waved  high  in  the  wind.  In  his  left  hand  he 
held  a  spear  &  in  his  right  a  sword.  His  countenance 
was  bold  &  resonute,  &  such  was  his  gracefulness  & 
eloqution,  when  he  spoke  that  all  eyes  were  fixed 
upon  him.  &  all  ears  were  attention. 

Brave  warriors  My  brave  sons  says  he,  I  extremely 
regretted  the  necessity  of  calling  you  from  your 
peaceful  employments  to  engage  in  the  bloody  scenes 
of  war.  But  such  is  the  violence  the  malice  &  ambi- 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  22J 


tion  of  the  Sciotan  government  that  nothing  will 
satisfy  them  but  hostilities  between  the  Empires. 
They  have  proclaimed  war  even  a  war  of  extermina 
tion  against  our  dominions.  Nor  was  it  in  our  power 
to  prevent  this  most  dreadful  calamity,  unless  we  tore 
asunder  the  bond  of  wedlock  between  the  prince  & 
princess  of  the  Empire.  A  transported  her  like  a 
Culprit  into  their  dominions.  This  was  the  only 
alternative  which  they  offered  to  accept,  to  prevent 
this  terrible  crisis.  A  why  the  rigor  of  this  demand? 
Was  it  because  the  young  Prince  had  violated  any 
law  either  human  or  divine?  No ;  it  was  because  the 
King  of  Sciota  had  fallen  in  love  with  the  Princess, 
A  wished  to  have  her  for  his  wife.  But  as  she  viewed 
him  with  the  utmost  hatred  A  disgust,  he  has  been 
disappointed.  To  gratify  his  malice  &  revenge,  he 
has  roused  the  Sciotans  to  take  arms,  A  threatens  to 
deluge  our  lands  with  the  blood  of  our  citizens  cfc  to 
lay  our  country  in  ruins.  It  is  a  war  on  their  part  to 
gratify  malice  A  revenge  &  nothing  will  satisfy  their 
malignant  passions  but  our  compleate  extermination. 
On  our  part  it  is  a  war  of  self  defense  of  self  preser 
vation,  a  defence  which  will  extend  to  our  wives  & 
our  children,  A  to  all  the  blessings  A  endearments  of 
life.  We  must  either  submit  to  behold  our  dearest 
friends  expiring  in  agonies  our  property  torn  from  us 
A  our  houses  in  flames  A  our  dearest  friends  expiring 
in  agonies  A  even  like  cowards  suffer  them  without 
resistance  to  cut  our  own  throats  or  we  must  meet 
them  like  men  determine  to  vindicate  our  rights,  A  to 
retaliate  all  their  intended  mischiefs.  Nor  need  we 
fear  the  event  of  the  contest.  Infinite  benevolence 


122  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

will  reward  our  situation.  &  grant  us  that  assistance 
which  will  give  success  to  our  efforts.  You,  my  brave 
sons  will  be  inspired  with  courage,  your  hands  will  be 
strong  for  the  Battle  &  their  warriors  will  fall  before 
you  like  corn  before  the  reapers  sickel.  With  all 
their  mighty  boasting  &  high  confidence  in  their 
superior  cunning  &  prowess,  they  are  men  formed  of 
the  same  materials  which  we  possess.  Our  swords 
will  find  a  passage  to  their  hearts,  &  the  vital  blood 
gushing  forth  they  will  fall  prostrate  at  our  feet.  Let 
us  march  then  with  courage  to  meet  the  implacable 
foe,  determined  either  to  die  gloriously  fighting  or  to 
obtain  victory. 

Having  thus  spoken,  the  whole  army  with  a  loud 
voice  replied,  Victory  or  death.  Lead  us  on  to  vic 
tory.  At  the  head  of  this  army  which  consisted  of  one 
hundred  &  fifty  thousand  men,  he  marched  toward 
the  great  River.  They  arived  at  the  bank  &  beheld 
the  Sciotas  all  busyly  employed  in  making  prepara 
tions  to  cross  the  River. 

The  Empress,  the  Princess  Lamesa,  &  the  Emper 
ors  daughters  attended  by  a  few  friends  &  their  serv 
ants  arrived  at  the  place  where  the  army  was 
encamped.  As  soon  as  Elseon  heard  the  news  of 
their  arrival,  he  hastened  to  the  place  &  found  the 
company  had  alighted  at  an  house  &  that  Lamesa  & 
her  friend  Holika  were  in  a  room  by  themselves.  As 
soon  as  he  entered  Lamesa  arose.  The  gloom  & 
anxiety  which  were  for  a  number  of  days  displayed 
visible  in  her  countenance  at  his  appearance  were 
dispelled.  He  received  her  into  his  arms  with  an 
affectionate  embrace,  &  expressed  the  greatest  pleas- 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  128 

ure  at  seeing  her  once  more.  The  tears  ran  down 
her  cheeks,  for  a  moment  she  was  silent,  she  raised 
her  head  <fe  replied.  O  Elseon,  were  it  not  for  you  I 
should  be  the  most  wretched  being  in  existence,  &  yet 
my  love  for  you  has  been  the  cause  of  all  my  present 
affliction.  If  I  had  never  seen  you,  those  horrid 
prospects  which  now  present  themselves  to  my  view, 
would  never  have  been.  But  you  are  innocent,  nor 
am  I  guilty  of  any  crime.  Buth  how  can  I  endure  to 
behold  the  calamities  which  must  fall  upon  both 
nations  in  consequence  of  our  connection?  Two 
empires  at  war,  spreading  carnage  &  ruin,  warriors 
bleeding  on  the  field  of  Battle,  innocent  women  & 
children  perishing  in  the  agonies  of  death,  <fc  towns  <fc 
cities  in  flames.  Ah  homed  prospect.  Have  you  & 
I  my  dear  Elseon  produced  these  dreadful  calamities? 
Is  our  conduct  the  cause  which  must  We  are  not  says 
he,  my  dear  Lamesa  responsible  for  for  the  horrid 
effects  of  malice  &  revenge  which  may  be  occasioned 
by  our  innocent  conduct.  If  men  will  be  so  indig 
nant  towards  each  other,  because  we  do  right  as  to 
massacre  &  do  all  the  mischief  they  can,  we  may 
deplore  their  weakness  &  depravity,  but  have  no  more 
reason,  to  make  ourselvs  unhappy  on  that  account 
than  if  these  effects  were  produced  by  some  other 
cause.  They  alone  are  responsible  for  their  crimes  & 
have  reason  for  unhappy  reflections. 

But  how  can  I  endure,  says  she,  to  see  my  dearest 
friends  become  each  others  implacable  enimy?  To 
see  them  mutually  engaged  to  destroy  each  others 
life?  My  Father  for  whom  I  ever  had  the  greatest 
affection,  &  my  only  Brother  are  now  at  the  head  of 


124  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

one  hostile  army,  &  your  father  &  you  my  dearest 
husband  are  at  the  head  of  the  other.  When  these 
armies  meet,  should  you  not  plunge  your  sword  into 
the  heart  of  my  Father  &  my  brother,  &  would  they 
not  do  the  same  by  you  if  in  their  power?  When 
such  scenes  present  themselves  to  my  view,  they 
pierce  my  soul  like  dagers.  &  produce  the  keenest 
anguish.  O  that  I  could  fly  to  my  Father  &  on  my 
bended  knees  implore  forgiveness. 

Yes,  says  Elseon,  when  you  have  done  that,  he  will 
give  you  to  the  mighty  Sambul  for  his  wife. 

No,  never  says  she,  never  would  I  submit.  I  abhor 
the  monster  more  than  ever.  He  is  the  most  malig 
nant  scoundrel  in  existence.  To  gratify  his  revenge 
whole  Empires  must  be  laid  in  ruins.  What  punish 
ment  more  just  than  that  he  himself  should  fall  in 
battle.  &  endure  the  agonies  which  his  vengeful  soul 
is  bringing  on  others?  But  as  for  my  Father  &  my 
Brother,  they  have  by  his  artifice  been  deceived.  I 
conjure  you  if  you  have  any  regard  for  my  happiness, 
not  to  take  their  lives  if  in  your  power.  Rather  than 
that  my  hands  should  be  stained  with  the  blood  of 
your  dearest  friends  I  will  present  my  bosom  to  their 
swords.  There  lives,  says  he,  are  safe  from  my 
sword,  but  hark,  there  is  an  alarm.  An  expres 
arived  &  informed  him  that  the  Sciotan  army  had 
found  means  to  get  their  boats  down  the  River  in  the 
night  unperceived,  &  had  landed  without  opposition 
about  three  miles  below  them  the  Kentuckian 
encampment  Elseon  then  embraced  his  wife  &  said 
when  your  protection  &  my  own  honour  call  I  must 
obey.  He  left  her  in  tears  imploring  heaven  to  pro- 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  125 

tect  him,  &  runing  swiftly  to  the  army  he  took  his 
station. 

CHAP.  XIV 

HAMBOON  mounted  on  an  eligant  horse  richly 
caparisoned,  rode  thro  the  encampment  proclaiming 
aloud,  every  man  to  his  station.  Seize  your  arms 
&  prepare  for  Battle.  All  his  princes  quick  to  obey 
his  commands  instantly  repaired  to  their  respective 
divisions.  &  gave  orders  to  form  their  men  into 
solid  collums.  When  this  was  done,  they  marched 
a  small  distance  to  the  pi  &  paraded  on  the  great 
plain  of  Geheno.  They  were  now  prepared  for  the 
hostile  engagement.  Their  officers  of  the  highest 
Ranks  marched  along  their  in  front  of  their  divisions 
&  by  their  speeches  they  inspired  the  men  with  bold 
ness  &  courage.  They  ardently  wished  to  behold 
their  enimies,  A  to  have  an  opportunity  of  display 
ing  their  valour  in  their  destruction.  Hamboon  then 
commanded  his  principal  officers  to  assemble  around 
him.  When  they  were  collected  which  was  in  front 
of  the  army,  he  thus  addressed  them. 

I  wish  for  your  opinion  my  brave 

NOTE.— Pages  143  and  144  are  missing. 

&  heroic  commanders  had  each  a  chosen  band  of 
warriors,  who  were  ordered  as  soon  as  the  battle 
should  begin  to  march  between  the  divisions  & 
charge  the  enimy.  in  order  to  break  their  order  <fc 
throw  them  into  confusion  The  design  of  this  arrange 
ment  was  to  break  their  ranks  &  to  throw  them  into 
confusion. 


126  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

The  command  of  these  bands  were  given  to  Elseon, 
Labanco  Hanack  &  two  counsellors  of  the  Emperor, 
Hamul  &  Taboon.    The  momentous  period  had  arived. 
Each  grand  army  were  now  ready,  were  anxious  for 
the    combat,   &    sanguine  in    their    expectations   of 
obtaining  a  glorious  victory.     Musicians  with  instru 
ments  of  various  kinds  were  now  playing  thro'  every 
division  of  both   Armies.     They  blowed  horns  pipes 
&  a  kind  of  trumpet,  &  beat  with  sticks  on  little  tubs 
whose    heads    were    formed    of    parchments.      The 
melody  was  truly  martial  &  calculated  to  inspire  each 
warrior  with  an  ardent  desire  for  battle  &  the  most 
daring  heroism.    All  was  hushed.    The  musicians  fell 
back  in  the  rear.     There  was  a  perfect  silence  thro' 
both    armies.      Each     Emperor    with    their    swords 
brandishing  rode  were  in  front  &  facing  their  respec 
tive  armies.     Near   three   hundred  thousand  spears 
were  glittering  with  the  reflection  of  sunbeams.    Not 
a  cloud  to  be  seen  in  the  east.     The  sun  shone  with 
unusual  brightness,  in  the  west  a  dark  cloud  began 
to   arise   &   distant   thunder   was   heard   to  rumble. 
Hambock  .proclaimed  with  a  voice  which  was  heard 
from  the  right   to   the  left  March  march  my  brave 
warriors,  &  fight  like  heroes.     Hamboon   saw  them 
beginning  to   move   but  not   changing   his   counte 
nance,   which  was   placid   &    bold,   he    proclaimed. 
Stand   firm    my  brave   sons      Let   your  arrows   fly 
thick  against  your  enimies  as  they  advance  &  finish 
with  your  spears  &  your  swords  their  destruction. 
The  Musick  again  played  &  both  armies  gave  a  tre 
mendous  shout.     Spears  &  swords 
When  the   Sciotans   had   advanced  with  a  firm  & 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  227 

moderate  step,  within  a  small  distance  of  Hamboons 
army,  they  both  armies  discharged  arrows  with  with 
such  unerring  aim  &  celerity  that  many  brave  war- 
riors  on  both  sides  fell  prostrate.     Others  were  sorely 
wounded  &  retired  back  in  the  rear.     Their  places 
were  immediately  supplied  &  the  second  Rank  coloped 
A  took  their  stations  in  the  front.     Each  man  fixing 
his  spear  horizontaly  &  about  as  high  as  his  breast 
the  Sciotans  rushed  forward  with  heroic  yels  &  horri 
ble  shoutings  &  made  a  most  tremendous  &  furious 
charge  upon  the  Kentucks.    They  received  them  with 
firmness  &  courage  spears  met  spears  &  many  were 
bent  or  broken  &  others  were  thrust  o~n~  both  sides 
into  the  bodies  of  heroes,  whose  blood  gushing  forth 
they  fell  with  horrid  groans  pale  &  lifeless  on  the 
sanguine  plain.     Neither  army  gave  back,  but  being 
nearly  equal  as  to  strength  &  numbers  they  poured 
forth  upon  each  other  with  a  lavish  hand  the  impli- 
ments   the  weapons   of  death  &  destruction   Deter 
mined    to    conquer    or    die,    it    was    impossible    to 
conjecture  which  Emperor  would   have  gained  the 
victory  had  the  divisions  or  bands  in  the  rear  of  each 
army   remained    inactive.      But   anxious  to  mingle 
charge  with  the  boldest  warriors,  the  Ken  tuck  bands 
led  on  by  their  heroic   princes  rushed   between  the 
divisions  of  the  grand  army  &  made  a  most  furious 
charge   on    the    Sciotans.     They   broke    thro*   their 
ranks,   piercing    their    indignant    foes   with    deadly 
wounds.     Heroes   fell   before  them  &  many  of  the 
Sciotans  being  struck  with  surprise  &  terror,  began 
to  retire  back.     But  the  bands  in  the  rear  of  their 
army  instantly  rushed  forward,  &  met  their  furious 


128  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

combatants.  The  battle  was  now  spread  in  every 
direction.  Many  valiant  chiefs  who  commanded 
under  their  respective  Kings,  were  overthrown  & 
many  thousand  robost  &  brave  warriors,  whose 
names  were  not  distinguished  by  office,  were  com- 
peled  to  receive  deadly  wounds  &  to  bite  the  dust.  It 
was  Elseons  fortune  to  attack  the  division  led  by  the 
valiant  Kamoff .  He  broke  his  ranks  &  killed  many 
warriors.  While  driving  them  furiously  before  him, 
he  met  Hamkol  at  the  head  of  many  Thousand  Scio- 
tans.  Hamkol  beheld  the  young  Prince  &  knew  him 
&  being  fired  with  greatest  rage  &  thirst  for  revenge, 
he  urged  on  the  comabat  with  the  most  driving  vio 
lence.  Now,  he  thot  was  a  favourable  chance  to 
gain  immortal  renown.  Elseon,  says  he,  shall  feel 
the  effects  of  my  conquering  sword.  The  warriors 
on  both  side  charged  each  other,  with  incredible 
fury,  &  Elseon  &  Hamkol  met  in  the  centre  of  their 
divisions.  I  have  found  you  says  Hamkol  perfidious 
monster,  I  will  teach  you  to  rob  our  Empire  of  its 
most  valuable  treasure.  He  spoke  &  Elseon  replied. 
Art  thou  Hamkol,  the  counsellor  of  Hamback  Your 
advice  has  produced  this  blood  &  slaughter.  Ham 
kol  raised  his  sword  &  had  not  Elseon  defended  him 
self  from  the  blow  he  never  would  have  spoken  again. 
But,  quick  as  the  lightning  Elseon  darted  his  sword 
thro'  his  heart  Hamkol  He  knashed  his  teeth  together 
&  with  a  groanTtumbling  headlong  with  a  groan 
expired. 

The  battle  raged.  Labanco  attacked  the  division 
of  Sambul.  His  conquering  sword  had  kiled  two 
chief  &  his  band  performed  the  most  brilliant  exploits 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY.19  120 

Sambul  met  him  <t  like  an  indignant  panther  he 
sprang  upon  him  &  while  Labanco  was  engaged  in 
combat  with  another  chief  Sambul  thrust  his  sword 
into  his  side.  Thus  Labanco  fell  lamented  &  beloved 
by  all  the  subjects  of  the  Empire  of  Kentuck. 
Hamack  His  learning  wisdom  &  penetration  of  mind, 
his  integrety  firmness  &  courage,  had  gained  him 
universal  respect  &  given  him  a  commanding  influ 
ence  over  the  Emperor  &  his  other  Counsellors.  He 
was  viewed  with  such  respect  <fc  reverence  that  the 
death  of  no  man  could  have  produced  more  grief  & 
lamentation  &  excited  in  the  minds  of  the  Kentuck  a 
more  ardent  thirst  for  revenge.  The  officers  of  his 
phalanx  exclaimed  Revenge  the  death  of  Labanco. 
Even  lightning  could  not  have  produced  a  more 
instantaneous  effect.  With  tenfoldrage  &  fury  his 
warriors  maintained  the  conflict  &  redoubled  their 
efforts  in  spreading  death  &  carnage.  Even  The 
mighty  Sambul  trembled  at  the  slaughter  of  his  sub- 
jects  warriors  &  began  to  despair  of  victory  he  began 
to  fearing  that  his  intended  revenge  was  turning  upon 
his  own  head.  During  this  slaughter  of  Sambuls 
forces  Hamack  was  engaged  in  battle  with  Habelan 
King  of  Chiauga.  No  part  of  the  war  raged  with  a 
more  equal  balance.  Warriors  met  warriors  with 
such  equal  strength  &  courage,  that  it  was  impossible 
to  determine  on  which  side  was  the  greatest  slaughter, 
even  their  heroic  chiefs  prudently  avoided  a  combat 
with  each  other  &  emploid  their  swords  in  overthrow 
ing  those  of  less  distinction.  The  field  was  covered 
with  the  bodies  of  heroes  besmeared  with  blood, 


130  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

which  was  spread  thick  on  every  side.  In  the  mean 
time  Hamul  &  Taboon  who  led  on  the  other  reserved 
divisions  of  the  Kentucks  were  fiercely  engaged  in 
spreading  the  war  thro'  the  ranks  of  the  Sciotans 
Hamul  compelled  to  the  division  commanded  by 
Sabulmah  to  fall  back,  but  still  they  fought  as  they 
slowly  retreated,  &  being  rein  forsed  by  a  body  of 
troops  in  their  rear,  they  continued  the  conflict  & 
maintained  their  position.  The  slaughter  was 
emence  &  each  party  boasted  of  the  most  brilliant 
achievements. 

Taboon  made  his  attack  on  the  division  of  Ulipoon, 
commanded  by  Harnelick.  The  Sciotan  ranks  were 
broken  &  they  must  have  fled  in  confusion  had  not 
Rameck  supported  them  with  his  division,  warlike 
band.  The  contest  now  became  bloody  furious  & 
equal  feats  of  valour  were  displaid  by  contending 
heroes.  The  thirsty  earth  was  overspread  with  the 
dead  and  dying  bodies,  of  thousands  &  saciated  their 
its  thirst  by  copious  draughts  of  human  blood. 
Hamelick  himself  was  slain,  but  not  until  his  sword 
was  crimsoned  with  the  blood  of  his  enimies  But 
The  dubious  war  appeared  at  last  determined.  Ham- 
back  beheld  his  army  giving  ground  on  every  hand. 
He  rode  throout  their  divisions  &  endeavored  to  inspire 
them  with  persvering  courage.  But  in  vain.  They 
could  not  withstand  the  impetuosity  the  numbers  & 
strength  of  their  Enimies.  Aided  by  the  advantage 
they  had  obtained  by  the  arrangement  they  had  made 
to  manage  the  conflict.  The  Sciotans  began  to  retreat. 
Such  was  the  situation  of  both  armies  that  they 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  26' / 

the  Sciotans  must  have  principally  been  to  overthrow 
&  destroyed  if  the  Kentucks  had  been  permitted  to 
continue  the  havoc  &  slaughter  they  had  begun.  But 
how  often  are  the  most  sanguine  expectations  disap 
pointed  by  the  decrees  of  heaven.  At  this  awful 
period  whilst  the  atmosphere  was  repleate  with  the 
multifarious  sounds  of  the  clashing  of  swords  <fc 
spears,  the  playing  melody  of  the  martial  musick 
-  -  -  -  the  shouts  of  the  conquerors  &  the  shrieks  <fc 
groans  of  the  dying,  even  then  the  heavens  were 
overspread  with  clouds  of  the  most  sable  hue,  which 
had  blown  from  the  West.  The  thunders  roared 
tremendously  &  the  flashes  of  lightning  were  incessant. 
The  wind  began  to  blow  from  the  west  with  great 
violence  the  hail  poured  down  from  the  clouds  &  was 
carried  with  great  velocity  full  in  the  faces  of  the  Ken- 
tucks.  They  were  unable  to  see  their  enimy,  or 
continue  the  conflict.  Hambock  &  his  princes  immedi 
ately  rallied  their  retreating  forces  <fe  facing  round 
encouraged  them  to  fight  courageously  since  the 
great  &  good  Being  had  miraculously  interposed  in 
their  behalf.  The  Kentuck  army  were  unable  to 
continue  the  conflict,  they  were  obliged  in  their  turn 
to  retreat,  but  such  was  the  violence  of  the  storm 
that  the  Sciotans  could  not  take  any  great  advantage 
of  the  confusion  of  their  enimies.  They  however 
pursued  them  to  the  hill  which  had  been  in  the  rear 
of  the  Kentucks,  overthowing  and  kiling  some  in 
the  pursuit.  But  as  the  hill  was  overspread  with 
trees,  which  broke  the  violence  of  the  wind  Hamboon 
commanded  his  men  to  face  their  pursuers,  The  Scio 
tans  finding  that  their  enimies  had  the  advantage  of 


132  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

the  ground,  <fe  being  intolerably  fatigued  with  the 
battle,  which  had  lasted  near  four  hours  retired  a 
small  distance  back,  &  as  soon  as  the  storm  abated, 
they  marched  beyond  the  ground  which  was  strewed 
thick  with  the  slain.  Thus  ended  the  great  battle  on 
the  plain  of  Geheno.  Both  There  they  encamped  & 
as  the  storm  had  now  subsided,  both  armies  pro 
ceeded  to  make  provision  to  refresh  themselvs,  being 
nearly  exhausted  by  the  fatcagus  fatigues  of  a  most 
bloody  contest,  which  had  lasted  nearly  five  hours. 
That  day  afforded  them  no  time  to  bury  their  dead. 
The  sun  did  not  tarry  in  his  course,  but  hid  himself 
below  the  horizon,  &  darkness  spread  itself  over  the 
face  of  the  earth.  The  warriors  with  their  spears  in 
their  hands  extended  themselvs  upon  the  earth,  & 
spent  the  night  in  rest  &  sleep.  Next  morning  they 
arose  with  renovated  vigour  Their  thots  were 
immediately  turned  to  the  sanguine  field.  Many 
warriors  say  they,  lie  there  pierced  with  mortal 
wounds  &  covered  with  with  blood.  Their  spirits 
have  assumed  etherial  bodies,  &  they  are  now  receiv 
ing  the  rewards  assigned  to  the  brave  on  the  plains  of 
glory.  But  they  demand  of  us  that  we  should  secure 
their  remains  from  the  voracious  jaws  of  carnivorous 
beasts  animals  by  intering  them  in  the  earth.  But 
how  can  this  be  done  unless  both  armies  will  mutually 
agree  to  lay  down  their  arms  during  the  interment,  of 
the  remains  of  their  respective  warriors.  Hamboon 
dispached  a  messenger  to  Hambock  who  agreed  to 
an  armistice  for  the  term  of  two  days,  &  that  ten 
thousand  men  might  be  emploid  from  each  army  in 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  133 

burying  the  dead.  It  was  indeed  a  melancolly  day. 
The  conquest  was  not  desided.  Neither  army  had 
gained  a  victory,  or  had  reason  to  boast  of  any 
superior  advantage  obtained  or  any  heroic  atchieve- 
ments  which  were  not  matched  by  contending  war 
riors,  an  emence  slaughter  was  made.  Hear  one  hun 
dred  thousand  were  extended  breathless  on  the  field. 
This  was  only  the  beginning  of  the  war  &  what  must  be 
the  dreadful  calamities  if  it  should  continue  to  rage? 
If  a  few  more  battles  should  be  faught,  &  the  enfuri- 
ated  conqueror  should  turn  his  vengeful  sword 
against  defenceless  women  &  children  &  mingle  their 
blood  with  the  blood  of  heroes,  who  had  fallen  bravely 
fighting  in  their  defence.  When  both  armies  viewed 
the  the  emence  slaughter  that  had  been  made  of  their 
respective  friends,  instead  of  cooling  their  ardor  for 
the  war  it  only  served  to  encrease  their  knowledge  & 
their  thirst  for  revenge. 

Ten  thousand  men  from  each  army  without  arms 
marched  to  the  field  where  the  battle  was  faught,  & 
having  selected  the  bodies  of  their  respective  warri- 
ors,  they  carried  as  many  of  them  together  as  what 
could  be  done  with  convenience  <fe  then  diging  into 
the  ground  about  three  feet  deep  ft  throwing  the 
dirt  around  in  a  circular  form  upon  the  edge  of  the 
grave  they  then  deposited  the  bodies  in  it.  covering 
the  ground  over  which  they  had  dug  with  the  bodies 
&  then  placing  others  upon  them  until  the  whole  were 
deposited.  They  then  proceede  to  throw  dirt  upon 
them  &  to  raise  over  them  a  high  mound.  In  this  man- 


134  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

ner  they  proceeded  until  they  had  finished  the  inter- 
ment  The  bodie8  of  the  chiefs  that  were  slain  were 
carried  to  their  respective  armies,  &  performing  many 
customary  solemnities  of  woe,  they  were  intered  & 
prodigious  mounds  of  eart  were  raised  over  them. 
After  the  funeral  rites  were  finished  &  the  armistice 
had  expired,  the  hostile  Emperors  must  now  deter^ 
mine  on  further  plans  of  operations. 
The  field  was  widely  strewed  &  in  many  places  thickly 
covered  with  human  bodies  extended  in  various  posi 
tions  on  their  sides  their  backs  &  faces.  Some  with 
their  arms  &  Jegs_jwidely_spread,  some  with  their 
mouths  open  &  eyes  stairing.  Mangled  with  swords 
spears  &  arrows  &  besmeared  with  blood  &  dirt.  Most 
hideous  forms  &  dreadful  to  behold.  Such  objects 
excited  horror  &  all  the  sympathetick  &  compassion 
ate  feelings  of  the  human  heart  As  both  Emperors 
had  agreed  to  the  suspension  of  arms  for  the  pur 
pose  of  burying  the  remains  of  these  of  the  heroic 
warriors,  ten  thousand  men  from  each  army  entered 
the  field  &  began  the  mournful  employment.  They 
dug  holes  about  three  feet  deep  &  in  a  circular  form, 
&  of  about  twenty  or  thirty  feet  diameter.  &  in 
these  they  deposited  the  bodies  of  their  decesed 
heroes  &  then  raised  over  them  large  mounds  of 
earth.  The  bodies  of  the  chiefs  who  had  fallen  were 
carried  to  their  respective  armies,  &  buried  with  all 
the  solemnities  of  woe.  Over  them  they  raised  pro 
digious  mounds  of  earth,  which  will  remain  for  ages 
as  monuments  to  comemorate  the  valiant  feats  of 
these  heroes  &  the  great  battle  of  Gaheno. 


THE  "MANUSCRIPr  STORY."  135 

After  the  funeral  Rites  were  finished,  A  the  armis 
tice  having  expired,  the  hostile  Emperors  must  now 
determine  on  further  plans  for  operation.  Hamback 
requested  the  advice  of  his  principal  officers,  who 
were  unanimous  in  their  opinion  that  it  was  their  best 
policy  to  retire  back,  to  the  hill,  which  was  opposite 
to  the  place  where  they  landed,  &  there  wait  for  rein 
forcements.  This  they  effected  the  next  night  with 
out  being  prevented  by  their  enimy.  Hamboon  the 
next  day  marched  toward  them,  but  not  thinking  it 
good  policy  to  attack  them  at  present  took  possession 
of  the  hill  in  plain  view  of  the  Sciotans  &  there 
encamped  with  his  whole  army.  As  the  Sciotana 
sallied  out  in  parties  to  plunder  &  to  ravage  the  coun 
try,  these  were  pursued  overtaken  A  met  by  parties 
of  the  Kentucks  Many  bloody  skirmishes  ensued  with 
varous  success,  <fc  many  feats  of  heroism  were  dis- 
plaid  on  both  sides.  Wherever  the  Sciotans  marched, 
devastation  attended  their  steps,  A  all  classes  of  peo 
ple  without  distinction  of  age  or  sex,  who  fell  into 
their  hands  became  the  victims  of  their  infuriated 
malice.  The  extermination  of  the  Kentucks  appeared 
to  be  their  oject,  not  considering  that  it  might  soon 
be  their  turn  to  have  such  cruelties  retaliated  upon 
themselves  with  three  fold  vengeance.  They  likewise 
had  a  further  object  in  view,  hich  was  to  provoke 
Hamboon  to  attack  the  main  army,  whilst  posted  in 
an  advantageous  situation  But  it  was  Hamboons 
policy  by  placing  garrisons  in  different  stations,  A  by 
patroling  parties  to  prevent  the  Sciotand  from  plun 
dering  &  destroying  his  towns,  A  from  obtaining  pro 
visions  from  his  country  A  in  this  way  to  compel  them 


136  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

to  cross  the  river  or  to  attack  his  army  in  the  poso- 
tion  he  had  taken.  While  the  two  Emperors  were 
thus  manoevering  &  seeking  by  various  arts  <fc 
stratigems  to  gain  an  advantage  over  each  other,  a 
very  extraordinary  incident_of_heroi8m  &  the  display 
of  the  most  sincere  &  ardent  friendship  transpired, 
displayed  transpired  which  is_worthy~_a_place  on 
the  historic  page  Insidents  transpired  of  heroism  <fc 
friendship.  In  the  dominion  of  Hamboon  there  lived 
two  young  men  who  were  bred  in  the  same  village, 
having  minds  formed  for  the  exercise  of  the  noblest 
principles  &  possessed  of  congenial  tempers.  They 
early  contracted  the  greatest  intimacy  &  formed 
towards  each  other  the  strongest  attachment.  They 
joined  the  standard  of  Hamboon  &  in  the  great  battle 
of  Gaheno  they  faught  side  by  side  &  performed 
exploits  equally  bold  &  heroic  they  eat  at  the  same 
board  &  drank  of  the  same  cup  &  in  all  their  excur 
sions  they  attended  each  other  &  walked  hand  in 
hand.  As  these  two  friends  were  seting  in  their  tent 
one  evening,  Theljard  who  was  the  oldest  says  to 
Hamkon  something  whisper  to  me  that  this  night  we 
can  perform  a  most  brilliant  exploit  The  Sciotans 
have  held  a  great  festival  &  until  midnight  they  will 
be  employed  in  singing  &  in  dancing  &  in  various 
diversions.  Being  greatly  fatigued,  when  they  lie 
down  to  rest  their  sleep  will  be  sound.  We  may  then 
enter  their  camp  by  slyly  getting  round  them  by  their 
centinels  unperceived  &  make  a  most  dreadful 
slaughter.  Your  plan  replied  Hamkion  is  excellent. 
It  is  worthy  of  the  character  of  an  hero.  I  will  join 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  137 

you.  I  will  either  triumph  with  you  in  the  success  of 
the  enterprize  or  perish  in  the  attempt*  Perhaps  we 
may  atchieve  a  glorious  deliverance  to  our  Country 
by  destroying  our  cruel  enimies.  They  both  taking 
their  swords  &  tomehauks  repaired  toward  the  camp 
of  the  Sciotans,  in  order  to  reconoiter  &  find  where 
they  could  enter  &  not  be  perceived  by  the  Centinals. 
The  Moon  shone  bright  but  would  set  about  three 
oclock  in  the  morning  This  was  the  time  they  had 
fixed  upon  to  begin  the  massacer  of  their  enimies. 

At  length  all  became  silent,  the  moon  disappeared 
A  these  young  heroes  had  accomplished  their  plan  in 
getting  into  the  camp  of  the  Sciotans  unperceived. 
They  found  them  lying  in  a  profound  sleep,  for  the 
fatigue  of  the  day  &  revels  of  the  night  had  bro't 
weariness  upon  them,  &  considering  when  they  came 
down  that  the  vigilence  of  their  guards  would  secure 
them  fro  surprize,  they  slept  with  an  unusual  sound 
ness,  but  their  vigilence  could  not  prevent  an  unsus 
pected  destruction.  The  Tomehauks  &  swords  of 
these  daring  youth  soon  caused  hundreds  to  sleep  in 
eternal  slumber,  &  so  anxious  were  they  to  finish  the 
destruction  of  their  enimies  that  the  day  began  to 
dawn,  before  they  had  cleared  themselvs  from  the 
camp  of  their  enimies  Scarce  however  had  they 
passed  the  last  Centinal  &  the  alarm  was  given.  The 
Sciotans  beheld  a  most  terrible  slaughter  of  their 
warriors,  &  being  fired  with  indignation  sallied  forth 
in  parties  in  every  direction.  Kelsock  &  Hamkoo 
had  nearly  gained  the  encampment  of  the  Kentucks, 
&  Hamkoon  with  a  party  of  Sciotans  had  overtaken 
Hamko.  Kelsock  was  so  far  in  advance  that  he  was 


138  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY.'1 

now  safe  from  all  danger,  but  turning  his  eyes  round, 
he  beheld  Hakoon  seize  his  friend,  who  was  attempt-  • 
ing  to  defend  himself  against  the  party.  Kelsock 
turned  instantly  &  runing  furiously  back  cried,  Spare 
oh  spare  the  youth,  he  is  innocent.  I  alone  contrived 
the  slaughter  of  the  Sciotans,  too  much  love  to  his 
friend  induced  him  to  join  in  the  enterprize,  Here  is 
my  bosom,  here  take  your  revenge.  Scarce  had  he 
spoken  &  Haloon  plunged  his  sword  into  the  heart  of 
Hamko.  The  young  hero  fell  &  with  a  groan  expired. 
Kelsock  instantly  rushed  upon  Haloon  &  darted  his 
sword  thro'  his  heart.  Prostrate  he  tumbled  at  the 
feet  of  Hamkoo.  But  Kelsock  could  not  long  sur 
vive.  A  spear  pierced  him  in  the  side.  He  cast  his 
eyes  on  the  lifeless  body  of  his  friend  &  fell  on 
his  lifeless  body  it,  he  embraced  it  &  never  breathed 
again.  Ah  heroic  youths,  in  friendship  ye  lived  &  in 
life  &  death  ye  were  joined. 

Forty  days  had  now  expired  since  the  two  armies 
had  taken  their  different  positions.  Each  had 
received  large  reinforcements  which  supplied  the 
place  of  the  slain.  Experience  had  taught  them  to 
use  stratigem  instead  of  attacking  under  great  dis 
advantages  &  yet  to  remain  long  in  their  present 
situation  could  not  possibly  terminate  the  war  suc 
cess  fully  on  the  part  of  the  Sciotans.  Rambock 
considering  the  obsticles  which  attended  the  prose 
cution  of  every  plan  at  last  by  the  advice  of  Sambul 
&  Ulipoon,  determined  on  a  most  rash  &  desperate 
enterprize.  An  enterprize  which  would  in  a  measure 
satiate  their  revenge,  provided  that  it  should  even 
produce  the  annihilation  of  the  army.  As  soon  as 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  13.0 

darkness  had  overspread  the  earth  at  night,  Rambock 
marched  his  whole  army  toward  the  City  of  Gamba. 
<fc  such  was  the  stillness  of  their  movements  that  they 
were  not  perceived,  nor  was  it  known  by  Hamboon 
that  they  had  marched  until  the  morning  light.  As 
soon  as  the  Kentucks  found  that  the  Sciotans  found 
that  had  abandoned  the  place  of  their  encampment  & 
found  the  direction  they  had  gone,  they  immediately 
pursued  them  with  the  utmost  expedition.  But  too 
late  to  prevent  the  intended  slaughter  db  devastation 
The  Sciotans  without  delaying  their  march  by  attack 
ing  any  forts  in  their  way,  merely  entered  the  vilages 
kiling  the  inhabitants  who  had  not  made  their  escape 
&  burning  their  houses.  They  arived  before  the  City 
of  Gamba.  Great  indeed  was  the  surprize  &  terror  db 
consternation  of  the  Citizens.  Many  fled  to  the  fort. 
A  band  of  about  three  thousand  resolute  warriors 
seized  their  arms,  determined  to  risk  their  lives  in 
the  defence  of  the  City.  The  leader  of  the  band  was 
Lamack  the  eldest  son  of  Labanco.  He  inherited  the 
virtue  of  his  excellent  Father  &  even  thirsted  to 
revenge  his  death,  by  sacrificing  to  his  manes  the 
bones  of  his  cruel  enimies.  He  posted  his  warriors 
in  a  narrow  passage  which  led  to  the  City.  The 
Sciotan  Emperor  immediately  formed  his  plan  of 
attack.  A  large  host  selected  from  all  the  grand 
divisions  of  his  army  marched  against  them.  They 
were  commanded  by  Moonrod.  He  led  them  on 
against  this  galant  &  desperate  band  of  Kentucks  <fc 
made  a  most  furious  &  violent  charge  upon  them. 
Bat  they  were  resisted  with  a  boldness  which  will 
forever  do  honour  to  their  immortal  valour.  Many 


140  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

hundreds  of  their  enimies  they  peirced  with  their 
deadly  weapons,  <fc  caused  heaps  of  them  to  lie  pros 
trate  in  the  narrow  passage.  Such  prodigious  havock 
was  made  on  the  Sciotans  by  this  small  band  of  vali 
ant  citizens  who  were  driven  to  desperation  &  whose 
only  object  was  to  sell  their  lives  dear  to  their  eni 
mies.  ,  that  even  Moonrod  began  to  despair  of  forcing 
his  way  into  the  City  thro'  this  naroow  passage. 
Being  informed  by  a  treacherous  Kentuck  of  another 
passage,  he  immediately  dispatched  a  band  of  about 
four  thousand  from  his  army  to  enter  the  city  thro 
that  passage  &  to  fall  upon  the  rear  of  the  Kentucks. 
This  plan  succeeded.  These  heroes  now  found  the 
war  to  rage  both  in  front  &  rear  &  part  facing  their 
new  assailants,  they  attacked  their  new  assailants 
them  with  incredible  fury.  What  could  they  do? 
Resistance  was  now  in  vain.  They  could  no  longer 
maintain  the  bloody  contest  against  such  a  mighty 
host.  Lamack  then  commanded  the  survivors  of  his  lit 
tle  band  to  break  thro'  the  ranks  of  his  last  assailants, 
&  to  retreat  to  the  fort.  It  was  impossible  to  withstand 
the  violence  of  their  charge.  They  broke  thro'  the 
ranks  of  their  enimies,  &  made  a  passage  over  the 
bodies  of  heroes,  thro'  which  the  retreated  &  marched 
to  the  fort.  About  seven  hundred  with  their  valiant 
leader  thus  made  their  escape  &  arived  safe  in  the  fort 
The  remainder  of  the  three  thousand  sold  their  lives  in 
defence  of  their  friends  &  their  country.  This  battle 
checked  the  progress  of  the  enemy  which  prevented 
an  emence  slaughter  of  Citizens,  as  the  greatest  part 
had  opportunity  by  this  means  to  gain  the  fort.  As 
soon  as  all  resistance  was  overcome  &  had  subsided, 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  141 

the  Sciotans  lost  no  time,  but  marched  into  the  city 
&  commenced  a  general  plunder  of  all  articles  which 
could  be  conveniently  transported.  Ulipoon  tho 
careful  not  to  expose  his  person  to  the  deadly 
weapons  of  an  enimy,  was  however  very  industrious 
in  this  part  of  the  war.  None  discovered  so  much 
engagedness  as  himself  to  grasp  the  most  valuable 
property  in  the  City.  But  expecting  the  Kentuck 
army  to  arrive  soon,  they  must  accomplish  their  mis 
chief  with  the  utmost  expidition.  The  City  they  sat 
on  fire  in  various  places  &  then  retired  back  <fc 
encamped  near  the  fort  intending  on  the  next  day, 
unless  prevented  by  the  arival  of  Hamboon  with  his 
army,  to  storm  the  fort  &  massacer  the  whole  multi 
tude  of  citizens  which  were  there  collected.  Behold 
the  conflagration  of  the  city  The  flames  in  curls 
spread  toward  heaven,  &  as  the  darkness  of  the 
night  had  now  commenced,  this  added  to  the  horror 
of  the  scene.  The  illumination  spread  far  &  wide  <fc 
distant  vilages  beheld  the  redning  light  assend.  as  a 
certain  pioneer  of  their  conflagration  should  the  war 
contilnue  to  rage.  But  mark  the  sorrow  &  lamenta 
tion  of  the  poor  citizens  now  encircled  by  the  walls  of 
a  fort.  Happy  that  they  had  escaped  the  massacer 
of  a  barbarious  unrelenting  enimy,  but  indignant  & 
sorrowful  at  beholding  the  ruins  of  all  their  property, 
&  even  filled  with  the  greatest  anxiety  lest  Hamboon 
should  not  arive  in  season  to  prevent  the  storming  of 
the  fort.  But  their  anxiety  soon  vanished. 

When  the  shades  of  evening  began  to  overspread 
the  earth  Hamboon  &  his  army  had  arived  within  five 
miles  of  the  city.  They  beheld  the  flames  beginning 


142  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

'to  spread.  The  idea  was  instantly  realized  that  an 
indiscriminate  slaughter  had  taken  place.  What 
were  the  distracted  outcries  of  the  dwellers  of  the 
city.  Fathers  &  mothers  brothers  &  sisters  wives  & 
children?  In  addition  to  the  destruction  of  all  their 
property,  they  now  had  a  realizing  anticipation  of  the 
massacre  of  their  dearest  friends  &  relations.  Such 
was  their  anxiety  to  precipitate  their  march  that  it 
was  scarcely  in  the  power  of  their  commander  to 
retard  their  steps,  so  as  to  prevent  them  from  break 
ing  the  order  of  their  ranks.  They  determined  how 
ever  to  make  the  utmost  expidition,  &  if  they  found 
their  enimy  to  take  ample  vengence.  But  when  they 
arived  &  found  that  the  greatest  part  of  the  citizens 
were  safe  in  the  fort,  this  afforded  no  small  allevia 
tion  to  their  anxiety  &  grief.  But  their  thirst  for 
revenge  &  their  ardent  desire  to  engage  the  enimy  did 
not  in  the  least  abate. 

Determined  that  the  Sciotans  should  have  no 
chance  to  improve  the  darkness  of  the  ensuing  night, 
to  make  their  escape,  every  preparation  was  made  to 
attack  them  the  next  morning.  This  was  expected  by 
the  Sciotans  who  were  wishing  for  another  opportu 
nity  to  measure  swords  with  the  Kentucks.  &  as  soon 
as  the  morning  light  appeared  they  marched  a  small 
distance  to  a  hill  &  there  paraded  in  proper  order  for 
battle.  Scarcely  had  they  finished  their  arrange 
ments  when  they  beheld  Hambooms  army  marching 
towards  them.  He  halted  within  about  half  a  mile  of 
the  Sciotans,  &  sent  out  a  small  party  to  reconoitre  & 
discover  their  situation.  In  the  meantime  he  ordered 
Hamack  his  son  to  march  with  twelve  thousand  men 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT 

around  the  Sciotan  army  &  lie  in  ambusl 
in  order  to  surprize  them  with  an  attack 
battle  should  commence. 

As  the  two  armies  were  paraded  in  fair  view  of 
each  other  the  expectation  was  that  a  most  bloody 
engagement  would  take  place  immediately.  .  The 
cowardly  mind  of  Ulipoon  was  not  a  little  terrified 
when  he  beheld  the  numbers  &  the  martial  appear 
ance  of  the  enimy.  But  his  inventive  genius  was  not 
long  at  a  loss  for  an  expedient  which  he  imagined 
would  extricate  himself  from  all  danger.  He  repairs 
to  Hambock  &  addressed  him  to  this  effect.  May  it 
please  your  your  majesty.  During  the  first  battle  it 
was  my  misfortune  to  be  prevented  from  being  at  the 
head  of  my  brave  warriots  &  displying  my  valour.  It 
is  my  wish  now  to  perform  feats  of  heroism  which 
shall  place  me  on  equal  ground  with  the  most  valiant 
princes  of  your  Empire.  With  your  permission  I  will 
lead  on  my  division  &  storm  the  fort  of  the  Kentucks. 
This  will  fill  their  warroiors  with  consternation  &  ter 
ror.  You  may  then  obtain  an  easy  victory  &  destroy 
them  with  as  much  facility  as  you  would  so  many 
porcupines.  Besides  by  attacking  the  fort  at  this 
time  when  they  are  not  expecting  such  a  manoever, 
the  imperial  family  will  be  prevented  from  making 
their  escape  &  I  shall  then  be  able  to  restore  to  your 
majesty  your  daughter  Lamesa.  The  Emperor  being 
pleased  with  the  plan  granted  to  Ulipoon  his  permis 
sion  to  carry  it  into  effect.  Ulipoon  did  not  wait  a 
moment.  But  immediately  returned  back  &  com 
manded  his  forces  which  consisted  of  about  seventeen 
thousand  to  march.  He  was  careful  to  see  that  they 


144  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

carried  with  them  at  the  same  time  all  the  plunder 
they  had  taken  in  the  City  of  Gamba.  &  particularly 
that  portion  which  had  been  set  apart  for  himself. 
But  nothing  was  further  from  the  heart  of  Ulipoon 
than  to  fulfill  his  promise.  He  had  no  intention  to 
risk  his  person  in  the  hazardous  attempt  to  storm  the 
fort.  But  his  determination  was  to  march  with  the 
utmost  expidition  to  his  own  diminions.  &  to  carry 
with  him  his  rich  plunder.  Having  marched  towards 
the  fort  until  he  had  got  beyond  view  of  the  Sciotan 
army.  He  then  ordered  them  to  turn  their  course  to 
the  great  River  to  the  place  where  they  had  left 
their  boats.  In  this  direction  they  had  not  pro 
ceeded  far  when  they  were  seen  by  a  number  of 
pioneers  whom  Hamack  had  sent  forward  to  make 
discoveries.  As  his  band  were  not  far  distant,  they 
soon  gave  him  the  intelligence.  He  immediately  dis- 
pacht  an  express  to  Ilamboon,  informing  him  that  he 
should  pursue  them  as  their  object  probably  was 
to  ravage  the  country, &  recommending  not  to  attack 
the  Sciotans  until  further  information  from  him 
Hamacks  division  were  not  discovered  by  Uiipoon  & 
of  consequence  he  proceeded  in  his  march  without 
suspecting  any  anoiance  from  the  enimy.  happy  in 
the  reflection  that  he  had  greatly  enriched  himself  by 
a  prodigious  mass  of  plunder  &  not  in  the  least  trou 
bled  about  his  fellow  warriors,  whom  he  had  deserted 
on  the  eve  of  a  most  hazardous  engagement.  Ham 
ack  pursued  him,  but  was  careful  not  to  be  discovered. 
When  the  sun  was  nearly  down  Ulipoon  halted  & 
encamped.  During  the  night,  Hamack  made  his 
arrangements.  He  formed  his  men  into  four  divisions 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY.11  145 

&  surrounded  the  enimy.  Their  orders  were  as  soon  as 
the  morning  light  began  to  appear  to  rush  into  Uli- 
poons  encampment  &  to  massacer  his  warriors  with 
out  discrimination.  The  fatal  moment  had  arived,  & 
punctual  at  the  very  instant  of  time,  the  attack  was 
begun  on  evey  part.  &  such  was  the  surprize  &  ter 
ror  which  it  produced  that  the  Sciotans  were  thrown 
into  the  utmost  confusion,  &  it  was  impossible  for 
their  officers  to  form  them  into  any  order  to  make 
defence.  Every  man  at  last  attempted  to  make  his 
escape,  but  wherever  they  rushed  forward  in  any 
direction,  they  met  the  deady  spears  of  the  Keatucks. 
It  is  impossible  to  describe  the  horror  of  the  bloody 
scene,  for  even  humanity  recoils  at  beholding. 
Humanity  sympathy  &  compassion  must  drop  a  tear 
at  beholding  the  uproar  &  confusion,  the  distress  & 
anguish,  the  blood  &  carnage  of  so  many  thousand 
brave  warriors,  whose  great  isfortune  was  to  have  a 
coward  for  their  commander  who  were  reduced  to 
this  situation  by  the  cowardice  4  dk  nigardly  &  avari 
cious  disposition  of  their  commander  But  only 
three  thousand  made  their  escape.  As  for  Ulipoon 
he  was  mortally  wounded  &  lay  prostrate  on  the  field 
After  the  slaughter  was  ended,  in  passing  over  the 
field  of  the  Slain  Hamack  beheld  this  illfated  prince 
an  object  truly  pitiable  to  behold.  In  the  agonies  of 
death  &  wreathing  under  the  most  acute  pains 
he  explaims  Alas  my  wretched  situation.  It  was  ava 
rice,  cursed  avarice  which  induced  me  to  enagge  in 
this  horrid  war  &  now  my  the  mischief  and  cruelties 
I  intended  as  a  means  to  acquire  wealth  &  agrandize- 


146  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

ment  are  justly  turned  upon  my  own  head.  He  spoke 
&  deeply  groaning  he  breathes  no  more  The  galant 
Hamack  droped  a  tear  &  feeling  no  enmity  toward 
the  lifeless  remains  of  those  who  had  been  his  enimies 
he  ordered  three  hundred  men  to  bury  remain  on  the 
ground  &  commit  their  bodies  to  the  Dust.  This 
says  he,  is  the  will  of  him  whose  compassion  is  infinite 
He  then  directed  Como  his  chief  captain  to  pusue  the 
survivors  of  Ulipoons  army  &  to  destroy  them  if  pos 
sible.  With  the  remainder  of  his  own  troops  he 
returned  back  to  cary  into  effect  the  order  of  Ham- 
boon.  Como  overtook  &  killed  about  a  thousand  of  the 
wretched  fugitives.  The  remainder  escaped  to  their 
own  land  except  about  fifty  who  fled  to  the  army  of 
Hamboon  &  gave  him  the  dreadful  intelligence  of 
Ulipoons  destruction.  Great  were  the  amazement  & 
consternation  of  Hambock  &  &  his  whole  army.  They 
now  beheld  their  situation  to  be  extremely  critical  & 
dangerous  &  saw  the  necessity  of  the  most  vigourous 
&  heroic  exertions.  What  says  Hambock  to  his 
princes,  is  our  wisest  Course  to  pursue?  Sabamah, 
Hancoll  &  Wunapon  advised  him  to  retreat  without 
losing  a  moment,  for  say  they  we  have  taken  ample 
revenge  for  the  crime  of  Elseon.  To  effect  this,  we 
have  thrown  ourselvs  into  the  heart  of  their  country, 
have  lost  a  large  division  of  our  army  &  are  so  weak 
ened  by  our  losses  that  we  are  in  the  utmost  danger 
of  being  defeated,  &  even  annahilated.  It  must 
therefore  be  the  hight  of  folly  &  madness  to  prosecute 
the  war  any  further  in  this  country  But  Sambul  &the 
other  other  princes  condemned  this  plan  as  pusilani- 
mous  &  disgraceful  &  proposed  to  steal  a  march  on  the 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  147 

Kentucks  &  to  storm  their  fort, before  be  ore  they  should 
be  apprized  of  their  design.  This  last  advice  met  the 
approbation  of  the  Emperor,  Nothing  says  he  can 
save  our  army  from  destruction  but  the  most  daring 
atchievements.  That  they  might  gain  the  fort  with 
out  being  perceived  by  the  Kentucks,  It  was  neces 
sary  that  they  should  march  some  distance  in  the 
direction  where  Hamack  had  encamped  in  order  to 
cooperate  with  Hamboon,  when  he  should  commence 
the  engagement.  When  the  night  had  far  advanced 
Hambocks  forces  were  all  "in  readiness  <fc  began  their 
inarch  for  the  fort.  They  proceeded  about  two  miles 
&  a  small  party  in  advance  discovered  Hamacks 
warriors.  This  discovery  produced  an  alter  ation  in 
Hambocks  plans.  He  directed  Sambul  to  proceed 
against  the  fort,  whilst  he  as  soon  as  the  light  should 
appear  would  attack  Hamack.  Sambul  was  highly 
pleased  with  this  command,  as  a  victory  would  ensure 
him  the  capture  of  Lamesa.  &  afford  him  an  oppor 
tunity  to  obtain  revenge.  He  arived  at  the  fort  just 
as  the  blushing  moon  began  to  appear.  Great  indeed 
was  the  surprize  which  his  arival  produced^  On  three 
sides  he  stationed  small  parties,  who  were  ordered  to 
massacre  all  the  citizens,  who  should  attempt  to  make 
their  escape.  With  the  main  body  of  his  army,  he 
made  an  assault  upon  the  fort.  Amazement  &  terror 
seized  the  minds  of  the  whole  multitude  of  citizens 
in  the  fort.  This  enterprize  of  the  Sciotans  was 
unexpectected^as  they  were  were  unprepared  to  defend 
the  fort  against  such  a  formidable  force.  Lamack 
however  placed  himself  at  the  head  of  about  one 


148  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY.11 

thousand  warriors,  &  attempted  to  beat  them  back 
from  the  wall  &  prevent  their  making  a  breach. 
But  it  was  impossible  with  his  small  band  to  withstand 
the  strength  of  such  a  mighty  army.  They  broke 
down  part  of  the  palisades  and  entered  the  fort  thro' 
the  breach  &  immediately  began  the  massacre  of  the 
defenceless  multitude  without  regard  to  age  or  sex. 
Sambul  being  anxious  to  find  Lamesa,  rushed  for 
ward  with  a  small  band  &  surrounded  a  small  block 
house  He  then  broke  down  the  door  &  entered.  Here 
he  beheld  all  the  ladies  of  the  imperial  family  &  many 
other  ladies  of  distinction.  He  instantly  sprang 
towards  Lamesa  in  order  to  seize  her,  but  was  pre 
vented  by  Heliza,  who  stept  between  them  &  falling 
upon  her  knees  implored  him  to  spare  the  life  of 
Lamesa.  Scarce  had  she  spoken  when  the  cruel 
monster  buried  his  sword  in  her  bosom,  &  she  fell 
lifeless  before  the  eyes  of  her  dearest  friend.  Lamesa 
gave  a  scream  &  looking  fiercely  on  Sambul  she 
exclaimed,  Thou  monster  of  villiany  &  cruelty,  could 
nothing  satiate  your  revenge  but  the  death  of  my  dear 
friend,  the  amiable  Haliza?  Here  is  my  heart  I  am 
prepared  for  your  next  victim.  Ah  no,  says  Sambul, 
your  life  is  safe  from  my  sword.  I  shall  conduct  you 
to  my  palace  &  you  shall  be  honored  with  me  for  your 
partner.  Insult  me  not  says  she,  thou  malicious 
bloody  villian.  Either  kill  me  or  begone  from  my 
sight.  My  eyes  can  never  indure  the  man  who  is 
guilty  of  such  monstrous  crimes.  Set  your  heart  at 
rest  says  he,  my  dear  Lamesa.  I  will  convince  you 
that  I  am  a  better  man  than  your  beloved  Elseon. 
His  head  shall  soon  satiate  my  revenge.  &  then  you 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  149 

shall  be  the  queen  of  Sciota.  At  this  instant  a  loud 
voice  was  heard.  The  Kentucks  are  marching  with 
a  prodigious  army  toward  the  fort.  Sambul  turning 
to  his  warriors  present  ordered  them  to  guard  the 
women  in  that  house,  &  not  permit  any  of  them  to 
escape.  For,  says  he,  I  must  go  and  destroy  that 
army  of  Kentucks.  Great  already  had  been  the 
slaughters  which  the  Sciotians  had  made  of  the  citi 
zens  in  the  fort.  Those  who  had  attempted  to  escape 
by  a  gate  which  was  thrown  open  were  met  &  massa 
cred  by  the  Sciotan  warriors  on  the  utside,  but  their 
progress  was  arested  by  the  appearance  of  Elseon  at 
the  head  of  thirty  thcmsand  warriors.  They  had 
marched  with  the  greatest  speed,  for  they  were 
informed  by  an  express  that  the  Sciotanshad  invested 
the  fort.  When  Sambul  beheld  them  he  instantly 
concluded  to  withdraw  his  army  out  of  the  fort,  &  to  try 
a  battle  with  them  in  the  open  field.  The  orders  were 
immediately  spread  thro'  every  part  of  the  fort  where 
his  men  were  employed  in  killing  the  defenceless  &  in 
fighting  with  the  little  band  of  desperate  heroes, 
whom  Hamack  commanded.  The  Sciotans  were  soon 
formed  &  marched  out  of  the  fort  &  paraded  in  proper 
order  for  battle.  Elseon  observing  this  commanded 
his  two  men  to  halt,  &  made  his  arrangements  to  rush 
forward  &  commence  the  attack.  Having  brandished 
his  sword  as  a  token  for  silence,  he  then  spoke. 

"My  brave  warriors,"  The  glorious  period  has 
arived,  for  arived  us  to  display  our  valour  in  the 
destruction  of  our  enimies.  What  monstrous  cruel 
ties  have  they  perpetrated?  Behold  your  city  in 
ruins,  listen  to  the  cries  of  your  murdered  friends 


150  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

whose  innocent  blood  calls  for  vengeance.  Consider 
the  situation  of  those  who  are  surrounded  by  the  walls 
of  yonder  fort,  how  many  thousand  are  massacred. 
&  how  many  must  share  their  fate  unless  you  fight 
like  heroes.  By  our  valour  we  can  effect  their  deliv 
erance  &  rid  our  land  of  the  most  disgraceful  mur 
derers  that  ever  disgraced  humanity.  Their  standard 
is  that  of  the  Sciotan  king,  whose  malice  &  vengeful 
disposition  have  produced  tis  horrid  war.  Urged  on 
by  his  malignant  passions,  he  has  engaged  under 
taken  a  most  desperate  &  mad  enterprize.  He  has 
thrown  himself  &  his  army  into  a  most  critical  <fc  dan- 
gerous  situation 

Fight  as  you  did  at  the  great  battle  of  Gaheno  &  your 
enimies  will  lie  prostrate  in  the  dust,  &  your  name 
shall  be  illustrious.  Rush  forward  my  brave  warri 
ors,  <fc  let  your  motto  be  victory  or  death. 

Not  a  moment  when  his  warriors  were  stimulated 
for  the  combat  did  Elseon  tarry,  but  marched  with 
precipitation  prepared  to  make  a  most  furios  charge. 
Sambul  was  ready  to  meet  him,  &  marched  forward 
with  equal  boldness  &  celerity.  The  charge  was  tre 
mendous,  not  the  dashing  against  each  other  of  two 
mighty  ships  in  a  hurricane  upon  the  boistrous  ocean 
would  have  been  more  terrible.  Each  warrior  fear 
less  of  danger  met  his  antagonist,  determined  to 
destroy  his  life  or  loose  his  own  in  the  contest.  The 
battle  extended  thro  every  part  of  both  armies.  As 
warriors  fell  in  the  front  ranks  their  places  were  sup 
plied  from  the  rear.  &  reserved  Bands  rushing 
between  the  divisions  were  met  by  others  of  equal 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STOUl'."  151 

strength  &  valour.  Helicon,  the  intimate  friend  of 
Elseon  beheld  Sambul  who  was  encouraging  his  war 
riors  to  fight  bravely.  As  no  other  alternative 
remained  for  them  but  victory  or  death.  When 
Helicon  beheld  him,  his  youthful  mind  felt  the 
impulse  of  ambition.  He  sprang  toward  Sambul  <fc 
challenged  him  to  the  combat.  Sambul  gave  him 
no  time  to  repeat  the  challenge  but  rushed  upon  him 
with  more  fury  than  a  tiger.  &  with  his  sword  he 
struck  Helicons  head  from  his  body.  Thus  fell  the 
brave  the  amiable  youth,  whose  thirst  for  glory 
impeled  him  to  attempt  an  exploit  too  rash  &  daring. 
Warriors  fell  on  every  side  &  the  field  was  covered 
with  the  dead  &  dying  heroes.  A  messenger  ran  <fc 
told  Elseon  of  the  fate  of  Helicon  who  commanded 
the  left  wing  of  his  army  &  that  Sambul  had  broken 
the  ranks  &  was  making  indiscribible  havock  of  his 
warriors.  What  intelligence  could  have  been  more 
shocking.  Elseon  could  not  refrain  from  tears  for  a 
moment.  Ah  Helicon  says  he,  thou  hast  been  more 
dear  to  me  than  a  brother.  Heaven  demands  that  I 
should  avenge  thy  cruel  death.  He  instantly  selected 
a  small  band  &  marched  with  the  utmost  speed  to  the 
left  wing  of  his  army,  he  ralied  his  retreating  warri 
ors  &  engaged  in  the  conflict  with  tenfold  fury.  Soon 
he  beheld  the  mighty  Sambul  whose  sword  was  crim 
soned  with  the  blood  of  his  friend,  &  Sambul  cast  his 
eyes  upon  him  &  as  he  beheld  him  his  malice  instantly 
inkindled  into  such  a  furious  flame  that  his  reason 
fled  for  a  moment  &  he  raved  like  a  madman,  both 
heroessprang  towards  each  other.  Their  warriors 
beheld  them  &  being  mutually  inspired  with  the  same 


152  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

sentiments  the  respective  bands  retired  back,  &  left 
the  two  indignant  champions  in  the  space  between. 

Ah  ingrate  exclaimed  Sambul.  Robber  &  perfidi 
ous  scoundrel,  after  securing  the  Emperors  daughter 
&  who  was  my  wife  &  transporting  her  from  our 
dominion  have  you  the  temerity  to  meet  my  conquer 
ing  sword?  This  sword  which  pierced  Labanco  &  cut 
of  the  head  of  Helicon  &  which  has  destroyed  hun 
dreds  of  warriors  more  mighty  than  yourself,  shall  be 
plunged  into  your  cowardly  heart,  &  your  head  shall 
be  carried  in  triumph  into  the  City  of  Tolanga,  & 
there  it  shall  be  preserved  as  a  trophy  trophy  of  my 
superior  strength  &  valour. 

Vain  boaster  says  Elseon  I  rejoice  to  meet  you; 
that  The  Benevolent  Being  will  now  terminate  your 
career  of  bloody  crime.  This  sword  shall  pierce  your 
malignant  heart,  &  cut  of  that  head  which  has  ploted 
the  ruin  of  my  country. 

Sambul  eager  for  revenge  could  hear  no  more  He 
sprang  forward  aimed  a  thrust  of  his  sword  at  Else- 
ons  heart  but  Elseon  turned  the  point  of  his  sword 
from  him  with  his  own  &  then  darted  his  sword  into 
his  left  arm.  which  caused  the  blood  to  gush  forth. 
Sambul  was  now  more  indignant  than  ever.  &  rais 
ing  his  sword  he  threw  his  whole  strength  into  one 
mighty  effort  with  the  intention  to  divide  his  body 
in  twain,  but  Elseon  quick  as  the  lightning  sprang 
back  &  Sambuls  sword  struck  the  ground  with  a 
prodigious  force,  which  broke  it  in  the  middle.  He 
himself  had  nearly  tumbled  his  whole  length  but 
recovering  &  beholding  his  defenceless  situation,  he 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  163 

ran  a  small  distance,  A  seizing  a  stone  sufficiently  big 
for  a  common  man  to  lift,  he  threw  it  at  Elseon.  It 
flew  with  great  velocity  &  had  not  Elseon  bowed  his 
head  his  brains  must  have  quited  their  habitation. 
His  Cap  however  was  not  so  fortunate.  Having  met 
the  stone  as  he  bowed  it  was  carried  some  distance 
from  him  &  lodged  on  the  ground.  Elseon  regardless 
of  his  Cap  ran  swiftly  upon  Sambul  whose  feet  hav 
ing  slipped  when  he  threw  the  stone  had  fallen  upon 
his  back  &  had  not  recovered.  Spare  oh,  spare  my 
life  says  he,  &  I  will  restore  peace  to  Kentuck  &  you 
may  enjoy  Lamesa.  No  peace  says  Elseon,  do  I 
desire  with  a  Man,  whose  sword  is  red  with  the  blood 
of  my  friend.  He  spoke  &  plunged  his  sword  into 
Sambuls  heart.  The  Sciotans  beheld  the  huge  body 
of  their  King  pale  &  lifeless.  Consternation  &  terror 
seized  their  minds.  They  fled  in  dismay  &  confusion. 
Elseon  pursued  them  with  his  warriors  &  overtook  & 
killed  thousands  in  the  pursuit.  About  two  thousand 
made  good  their  escape,  &  carried  the  doleful  tidings 
of  Sambuls  death  &  the  slaughter  of  his  army  to  their 
own  land,  &  indeed  their  escape  was  owing  to  the 
great  anxiety  of  Elseon  &  his  warriors  to  visit  their 
friends  in  the  fort  &  to  ascertain  the  extent  of  the 
massacre  that  Sambul  &  his  army  had  made.  After 
pursuing  the  Sciotans  about  six  miles  Elseon  &  his 
army  returned  in  great  haste  &  entered  the  fort. 
Great  inexpressibly  great  was  the  joy  of  the  citizens 
when  they  beheld  them  re-turning  with  the  laurels  of 
Victory.  &  when  they  were  informed  of  the  destruc 
tion  of  so  many  thousands  of  their  enimies.  But  as 
great  was  the  grief  &  lamentation  when  they  beheld 


154  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

&  reflected  on  the  vast  number  of  citizens  &  of  Else- 
ons  warriors  who  hud  fallen  by  the  sword  of  the 
Sciotans.  But  no  death  produced  such  universal 
regret  &  sorrow  as  those  of  Helicon  &  Heliza.  The 

D 

one  was  the  intimate  friend  of  Elseon  &  the  other  of 
Lamesa.  They  both  possessed  hearts  which  were 
formed  for  the  most  ardent  friendship  &  love.  Their 
acquaintance  produced  a  sincere  attachment.  They 
exchanged  vows  of  perpetual  fidelity  &  love  to  each 
other,  &  only  waited  for  the  termination  of  the  war  to 
fulfill  their  mutual  engagement,  to  unite  their  hands 
in  wedlock.  But  their  pleasing  anticipation  of  con 
jugal  felicity  was  destroyed  by  the  cruel  sword  of 
Sambul.  Naught  availed  the  innocence  &  the  amia 
ble  accomplishments  of  the  fair  Haliza.  She  must 
fall  a  victim  to  satiate  the  revenge  of  a  barbarous 
tyrant.  Had  Helicon  known  when  he  attacked  the 
savage  monster,  that  he  had  Iwd  assassinated  his 
beloved  Heliza,  it  would  have  inspired  him  with  the 
added  desire  for  revenge  &  added  vigour  to  hia  arm 
&  keenness  to  hu  sword.  Ah,  said  A  Kentuck  bard 
represented  the  etherial  form  of  Ileliza  as  arriving  on 
the  celestial  plain,  &  being  told  that  she  must  wait  a 
short  time  &  Helicon  would  arrive  &  conduct  her  as 
his  partner  to  a  delightful  bower  which  was  sur 
rounded  by  the  most  beautiful  flowers  &  delicious 
fruits,  &  where  they  singing  of  musikal  birds  would 
charm  them  with  their  melody. 

When  Elseon  had  entered  the  fort  he  found  that 
Lamack  with  his  little  band  had  made  prisoners  of 
the  Sciotan  warriors  whom  Sambul  had  left  to  guard 
the  imperial  ladies,  &  that  the  Sciotans  had  done 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  ZSo 

them  no  injury  nor  even  insulted  them  with  words. 
Says  Elseon,  for  this  honourable  treatment  of  my 
friends  I  will  show  these  enimies  compassion.  Go, 
says  he  to  them,  return  in  peace  to  your  own  land,  A 
tell  your  friends  that  Elseon  will  not  hurt  an  enimy 
who  has  done  him  a  favour.  The  time  of  Elseon  was 
precious.  He  spent  but  a  few  moments  with  Lamesa, 
in  which  they  exchanged  mutual  congratulations  & 
expressions  of  the  most  tender  &  sincere  affection. 
She  conjured  him  to  spare  the  life  of  her  father  & 
brother  &  not  to  expose  his  own  life  any  farther  than 
his  own  honour  &  the  interest  of  his  country  required. 
I  shall  cheerfully  says  he,  comply  with  every  request 
which  will  promote  your  happiness.  He  embraced 
her,  &  bade  her  adieu.  As  the  situation  of  Ham- 
boons  army  might  require  his  immediate  return,  he 
lost  no  time  to  regulate  matters  in  the  fort.  But 
leaving  five  thousand  men  to  bury  the  dead  and  attend 
the  citizens  he  marched  with  the  remainder  which 
consisted  of  about  twenty  thousand  to  Hamboons 
encampment.  When  Sambul  marched  with  his  divi 
sion  against  the  fort,  it  was  Hambocks  intention  to 
have  attacked  Hamack  the  next  morning,  but  per 
ceiving  that  Hamboon  had  been  apprized  of  his 
movements  &  was  then  within  a  small  distance  ready 
to  cooperate  with  Hamacks  division,  Hamback  altered 
his  plan  &  determined  to  wait  for  the  return  of 
Sambul.  As  for  Hamboon  he  concluded  to  wait  until 
Elseons  return.  These  determinations  of  the  hostile 
Emperors  prevented  for  the  time  any  engagements 
between  the  two  grand  armies.  But  when  the  fate 
of  Sambuls  division  was  decided  <fc  Elseon  had 


256  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

returned  with  the  joyful  news  of  his  victory,  the 
Kentucks  were  all  anxious  for  an  immediate  Battle. 

NOTE.— This  was  found  with  the  foregoing  manuscript  and  in 
the  same  handwriting. 

But  having  every  reason  to  place  the  highest  confi 
dence  in  your  friendship  &  prudence  I  have  no  reluc 
tance  in  complying  with  with  your  request,  in  giving 
you  my  sentiments  of  the  Christian  Religion.  And  so 
far  from  considering  the  freedom  you  take  in  making 
the  request  impertinence  I  view  it  as  a  mark  of  your 
high  esteem  for  me  affectionate  solicitude  for  my  hap 
piness.  In  giving  you  my  sentiments  of  the  Chris 
tian  religion,  you  will  perceive  that  I  am  not  trameled 
with  traditionary  &  vulgar  prejudice  that  I  do  not 
believe  certain  parts  <fc  certain  parts  &  certain  propo 
sitions  to  be  treu  merely  because  that  my  ancestors 
believe  them  &  because  they  are  popular.  In  form 
ing  my  creed  I  bring  everything  to  the  standard  of 
reason,  that  intellectual  This  is  an  unerring  &  sure 
guide  in  all  matters  of  faith  &  practice.  Having 
divested  myself  heretofore  of  traditionary  &  vulgar 
prejudice,  &  submiting  to  the  guidance  of  reason  it 
is  impossible  for  me  to  have  the  same  sentiments  of 
the  Christian  religion  which  its  advocates  con 
sider  as  orthodox.  It  is  in  my  view  a  mass  of 
contradictions.  &  an  heterogeneous  mixture  of 
wisdom  &  folly,  nor  can  I  find  any  clear  &  incon- 
trivertible  evidence  of  its  being  a  revelation  from 
an  infinitely  benevolent  &  wise  God.  It  is  true 
that  I  never  have  had  the  leisure  nor  patience 
to  read  the  elaborate  &  varied  productions  of  divines 


THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY."  157 

in  its  vindication,  every  part  of  it  with  critical  atten 
tion  or  tostudy  the  metaphysical  jargon  of  divines  in 
its  vindication.  It  is  enough  for  me  to  know  that 
propositions  which  are  in  contradiction  to  each  other 
oannot  both  be  true,  &  that  doctrines  &  facts  which 
represent  the  supreme  being  as  a  barbarous  &  cruel 
tyrant  can  never  be  dictated  by  infinite  wisdom. 
Whatever  the  clergy  say  on  the  contrary  can  have  no 
effect  in  altering  my  sentiments.  I  know  as  well  as 
they  that  two  &  two  make  four,  <fc  that  three  angles 
of  a  triangle  of  a  triangle  are  equal  to  two  right 
angles.  But  notwithstanding  I  disavow  any  belief  in 
in  the  divinity  of  the  Bible,  <fc  consider  it  as  a  mere 
human  production  designed  to  inrich  &  agrandize  its 
authors  &  to  enable  them  to  manage  the  multitude. 
Yet  casting  aside  a  considerable  mass  of  rubbish  & 
fanatical  rant,  I  find  that  it  contains  a  system  of  eth 
ics  or  morals  which  cannot  be  excelled  on  account  of 
their  tendency  to  amiliorate  the  condition  of  man.  & 
to  promote  individual  social  &  public  happiness  &  that 
in  various  instances  it  represents  the  Almighty  as 
possessing  attributes  worthy  of  transcendent  charac 
ter,  having  a  view  therefore  to  those  parts  of  the 
Bible  which  are  truly  good  <fc  excellent  I  sometimes 
speak  of  it  in  terms  of  high  commendation.  And 
indeed  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that  notwithstanding 
the  mischief  s&  in  juries  which  have  been  produced  by 
the  bigoted  zeal  of  fanatics  &  interested  priests  yet  that 
such  evils  are  more  than  counterbalanced  in  a  Chris 
tian  land  by  the  benefits  which  result  to  the  great 
mass  of  the  people  by  their  believing  that  the  Bible  is 
of  divine  origin.  &  that  it  contains  a  revelation  from 


158  THE  "MANUSCRIPT  STORY." 

God.  Such  being  my  view  of  the  subject,  I  pre  fer 
my  candle  to  remain  under  to  remain  under  a  bushel, 
nor  make  no  exertions  to  dissipate  their  happy  delu 
sion,  as 

NOTE  OF  COPYIST.— On  the  other  side  of  the  paper  on  which 

the  above  is  written  &  in  what  seems  the  same  hand  is 

the  following: 

Itham  Joyner  privlg  to  erect  Mill,  &  the  pvlg  of  wtr. 
Wright  has  prefern  &  he  next.  To  fix  to  take  out  wtr 
for  himslf  &  to  be  at  one  J-  expense  of  keeping  dam  in 
repair.  If  wishing  to  sell  to  gv  Wrt  pvlg  buing  if 
dont  buy  to  sel  to  another  his  works  but  not  pvlg  of 
wtr  I.  Joyner  &  W.  Brigham  agree  to  build  a  house 
for  their  use.  Sd  B.  to  6  feet  on  the  water  below  the 
width  of  the  house  &  J  to  have  for  six  feet  &  B.  to  12 
feet  on  the  same  side  in  the  rear  bank  &  12  feet  of  the 
garret,  to  be  at  equal  expense  in  the  water  works. 
To  be  at  equal  expense  in  the  partitions  of  the  rooms. 

The  Writing  s  of  Sollomon  Spaulding  Proved  'by  sir  on 
Wright  Oliver  Smith,  John  N  Miller  &  others. 
The  testimonies  of  the  above  Gentlemen  are  now  in  my 
uossession.  Signed 

D.  P.  ffURLBUT. 


